A TALE OF THE PASSIONS; OR, THE DEATH  OF DESPINA

AFTER the death of Manfred, King of Naples, the 
Ghibellines lost their ascendency throughout Italy. The 
exiled Guelphs returned to their native cities ; and, not 
contented with resuming the reins of government, they 
prosecuted their triumph until the Ghibellines in their 
turn were obliged to fly, and to mourn in banishment 
over the violent party spirit which had before occasioned 
their bloody victories, and now their irretrievable defeat. 
After an obstinate contest, the Florentine Ghibellines 
were forced to quit their native town ; their estates were 
confiscated; their attempts to reinstate themselves frus 
trated ; and receding from castle to castle, they at length 
took refuge in Lucca, and awaited with impatience the 
arrival of Corradino from Germany, through whose 
influence they hoped again to establish the Imperial 
supremacy. 

The first of May was ever a day of rejoicing and 
festivity at Florence. The youth of both sexes, and of 
all ranks, paraded the streets, crowned with flowers, and 
singing the canzonets of the day. In the evening they 
assembled in the Piazza del Duomo, and spent the hours 
in dancing. The Carroccio was led through the principal 
streets, the ringing of its bell drowned in the peals that 
rang from every belfry in the city, and in the music of 
fifes and drums which made a part of the procession 

112 



A TALE OP THE PASSIONS. 113 

that followed it. The triumph of the reigning party in 
Florence caused them to celebrate the anniversary of the 
first of May, 1268, with peculiar splendour. They had 
indeed hoped that Charles d Anjou, King of Naples, the 
head of the Guelphs in Italy, and then Vicare (President) 
of their republic, would have been there to adorn the 
festival by his presence. But the expectation of Corra- 
dino had caused the greater part of his newly-conquered 
and oppressed kingdom to revolt, and he had hastily 
quitted Tuscany to secure by his presence those con 
quests of which his avarice and cruelty endangered 
the loss. But although Charles somewhat feared the 
approaching contest with Corradino, the Florentine 
Guelphs, newly reinstated in their city and possessions, 
did not permit a fear to cloud their triumph. The 
principal families vied with each other in the display 
of their magnificence during the festival. The knights 
followed the Carroccio on horseback, and the windows 
were filled with ladies who leant upon gold - inwoven 
carpets, while their own dresses, at once simple and 
elegant, their only ornaments, flowers, contrasted with 
the glittering tapestry and the brilliant colours of the 
Hags of the various communities. The whole population 
of Florence poured into the principal streets, and none 
were left at home, except the decrepid and sick, unless 
it were some discontented Ghibelline, whose fear, poverty, 
or avarice had caused him to conceal his party when it 
had been banished from the city. 

It was not the feeling of discontent which prevented 
Monna Gegia de Becari from being among the first of 
the revellers ; and she looked angrily on what she called 
her "Ghibelline leg," which fixed her to her chair on 
such a day of triumph, The sun shone in all its glory 
in an unclouded sky, and caused the fair Florentines to 
draw their fazioles (veils) over their dark eyes, and to 
bereave the youth of those beams more vivifying than 

H 



114 MAliY W. SHELLEY. 

the sun s rays. The same sun poured its full light 
into the lonely apartment of Monna Gegia, and almost 
extinguished the fire which was lighted in the middle 
of the room, over which hung the pot of minestra, the 
dinner of the dame and her husband. But she had 
deserted the fire, and was seated by her window, holding 
her beads in her hand, while every now and then she 
peeped from her lattice (five storeys high) into the 
narrow lane below ; but no creature passed. She looked 
at the opposite window ; a cat slept there beside a pot 
of heliotrope, but no human being was heard or seen, 
they had all gone to the Piazza del Duomo. 

Moima Gegia was an old woman, and her dress of 
green calrasio (stuff) showed that she belonged to one 
of the Arli Minori (working classes). Her head was 
covered by a red kerchief, which, folded triangularly, 
hung loosely over it ; her grey hairs were combed back 
from her high and wrinkled brow. The quickness of her 
eye spoke the activity of her mind, and the slight irrita 
bility that lingered about the corners of her lips might 
be occasioned by the continual war maintained between 
her bodily and mental faculties. " Now, by St. John ! " 
she said, "I would give my gold cross to make one of 
them; though by giving that I should appear on afesta, 
without that which nofesta yet ever found me wanting." 
And as she spoke she looked with great complacency on 
a large but thin gold cross which was tied round her 
withered neck by a ribbon, once black, now of a rusty 
brown. " Methinks this leg of mine is bewitched ; and 
it may well be that niy Ghibelline husband has used the 
black art to hinder me from following the Carroccio with 
the best of them." A slight sound, as of footsteps in 
the street far below, interrupted the good woman s 
soliloquy. " Perhaps it is Monna Lisabetta, or Messer 
Giani dei Agli, the weaver, who mounted the breach first 
when the castle of Pagibonzi was taken." She looked 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 115 

down, but could sec no one, and was about to relapse 
into her old train of thoughts, when her attention was 
again attracted by the sound of steps ascending the 
stairs : they were slow and heavy, but she did not 
doubt who her visitant was when a key was applied to 
the hole of the door; the latch was lifted up, and a 
moment after, with an unassured mien and downcast 
eyes, her husband entered. 

He was a short, stunted man, more than sixty years of 
age ; his shoulders were broad and high ; his lank hair 
was still coal-black ; his brows were overhanging and 
bushy ; his eyes black and quick ; his lips as it were 
contradicted the sternness of the upper part of his face, 
for their gentle curve betokened even delicacy of senti 
ment, and his smile was inexpressibly sweet. He had 
on a low-crowned, red cloth cap, which he drew over 
his eyes, and, seating himself on a low bench by the 
fire, he heaved a deep sigh. He appeared disinclined 
to enter into any conversation, but Monna Gegia was 
resolved that he should not enjoy his melancholy mood 
uninterrupted. 

" Have you been to mass, Cincolo 1 " she asked, 
beginning by a question sufficiently removed from the 
point she longed to approach. He shrugged his shoulders 
uneasily, but did not reply. " You are too early for your 
dinner," continued Gegia; "do you not go out again?" 

Cincolo answered " Xo ! " in an accent that denoted 
his disinclination to further questioning. But this very 
impatience only served to feed the spirit of contention 
that was fermenting in the bosom of Gegia. 

" You are not used," she said, " to pass your May days 
under your chimney." No answer. "Well," she con 
tinued, "if you will not speak, I have done !" meaning 
that she intended to begin "but by that lengthened 
face of thine I see that some good news is stirring 
abroad, and I bless the Virgin for it, whatever it may 



116 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

be. Come, tell me what happy tidings make thee so 
woe-begone." 

Cincolo remained silent for awhile, then turning half 
round, but not looking at his wife, he replied, " What if 
old Marzio the lion bo dead 1 n 

Gegia turned pale at the idea, but a smile that lurked 
in the good-natured mouth of her husband reassured 
her. 

"Nay, St. John defend us!" she began, "but that is 
not true. Old Marzio s death would not drive you 
within these four walls, except it were to triumph over 
your old wife. By the blessing of St. John, not one of 
our lions have died since the eve of the battle of Monte 
Aperto ; and I doubt not that they were poisoned ; f or 
Mari, who fed them that night, was more than half a 
Ghibelline in his heart. Besides, the bells are still 
ringing, and the drums still beating, and all would be 
silent enough if old Marzio were to die. On the first 
of May too ! Santa Reparata is too good to us to allow 
such ill-luck ; and she has more favour, I trust, in the 
seventh heaven than all the Ghibelline saints in your 
calendar. No, good Cincolo, Marzio is not dead, nor the 
Holy Father, nor Messar Carlo of Naples ; but I would 
bet my gold cross against the wealth of your banished 



" And I here ! No, Gegia, old as I am, and much as 
you need my help (and that last is why I am here at all), 
Pisa would not be taken while this old body could stand 
in the breach ; or Corradino die, till this lazy blood were 
colder on the ground than it is in my body. Ask no 
more questions, and do not rouse me : there is no news, 
no good or ill luck, that I know. But when I saw the 
Neri, the Pulci, the Buondelmonti, and the rest of them, 
ride like kings through the streets, whose very hands are 
hardly dry from the blood of my kindred ; when I saw 
their daughter crowned with flowers, and thought how 



A TALE OP THE PASSIONS. 117 

the daughter of Arrigo del Elisei was mourning for her 
murdered father, with ashes on her head, by the hearth 
of a stranger, my spirit must be more dead than it is if 
such a sight did not make me wish to drive among them ; 
and methought I could scatter their pomp with my awl 
for a sword. But I remembered thee, and am here 
unstained with blood." 

" That thou wilt never be ! " cried Monna Gegia, the 
colour rising in her wrinkled cheeks. " Since the battle 
of Monte Aperto thou hast never been well washed of 
that shed by thee and thy confederates ; and how could 
ye ? for the Arno has never since run clear of the blood 
then spilt." 

" And if the sea were red with that blood, still, while 
there is any of the Guelphs to spill, I am ready to spill 
it, were it not for thee. Thou dost well to mention 
Monte Aperto, and thou wouldst do better to remember 
over whom its grass now grows." 

" Peace, Cincolo ; a mother s heart has more memory 
in it than thou thinkest ; and I well recollect who spurned 
me as I knelt, and dragged my only child, but sixteen 
years of age, to die in the cause of that misbeliever 
Manfred. Let us indeed speak no more. Woe was the 
day when I married thee ! but those were happy times 
when there was neither Guelph nor Ghibelline ; they 
will never return." 

" Never, until, as thou sayest, the Arno run clear of 
the blood shed on its banks ; never while I can pierce 
the heart of a Guelph ; never till both parties are cold 
under one bier." 

" And thou and 1, Cincolo ? " 

" Are two old fools, and shall be more at peace under 
ground than above it. Bank Guelph as thou art, I 
married thee before I was a Ghibelline ; so now I must 
eat from the same platter with the enemy of Manfred, 
and make shoes for Guelphs, instead of following the 



118 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

fortunes of Dorradino, and sending them, my battle-axe 
in my hand, to buy their shoes in Bologna." 

" Hush ! hush ! good man, talk not so loud of thy 
party ; nearest thou not that some one knocks ? " 

Cincolo went to open the door with the air of a man 
who thinks himself ill-used at being interrupted in his 
discourse, and is disposed to be angry with the intruder, 
however innocent he might be of any intention of break 
ing in upon his eloquent complaint. The appearance of 
his visitor calmed his indignant feelings. He was a 
youth whose countenance and person showed that he 
could net be more than sixteen ; but there was a self- 
possession in his demeanour, and a dignity in his 
physiognomy, that belonged to a more advanced age. 
His figure was slight, and his countenance, though 
beautiful, was pale as monumental marble ; the thick 
and curling locks of his chestnut hair clustered over his 
brow and round his fair throat ; his cap was drawn far 
down on his forehead. Cincolo was about to usher him 
with deference into his humble room, but the youth 
stayed him with his hand, and uttered the words "Swabia, 
Cavalieri!" the words by which the Ghibellines were 
accustomed to recognise each other. He continued in 
a low and hurried tone : " Your wife is within *\ " 
" She is." 

" Enough. Although I am a stranger to you, I come 
from an old friend. Harbour me until nightfall; we 
will then go out, and I will explain to you the motives 
of my intrusion. Call me Ricciardo de Rossini of 
Milan, travelling to Rome. I leave Florence this 
evening." 

Having said these words, without giving Cincolo time 
to reply, he motioned that they should enter the room. 
Monna Gcgia had fixed her eyes on the door from the 
moment he had opened it, with a look of impatient 
curiosity ; when she saw the youth enter, she could not 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 119 

refrain from exclaiming, " Gesu Maria ! " so different 
was he from any one she had expected to see. 

" A friend from Milan," said Cincolo. 

" More likely from Lucca," replied his wife, gazing on 
her visitant. "You are doubtless one of the banished 
men, and you are more daring than wise to enter this 
town ; however, if you be not a spy, you are safe with 
me." 

Bicciardo smiled and thanked her in a low, sweet 
voice. " If you do not turn me out," he said, " I shall 
remain under your roof nearly all the time I remain in 
Florence, and I leave it soon after dusk." 

Gegia again gazed on her guest, nor did Cincolo 
scrutinize him with less curiosity. His black cloth tunic 
reached below his knees, and was confined by a black 
leather girdle at the waist. He had on trousers of coarse 
scarlet stuff, over which were drawn short boots ; a cloak 
of common fox s fur, unlined, hung from his shoulder. 
But, although his dress was thus simple, it was such as 
was then worn by the young Florentine nobility. At 
that time the Italians were simple in their private habits : 
the French army led by Charles d Anjou into Italy, first 
introduced luxury into the palaces of the Cisalpines. 
Manfred was a magnificent prince, but it was his saintly 
rival who was the author of that trifling foppery of dress 
and ornaments which degrades a nation, and is a sure 
precursor of their downfall. But of Ricciardo his 
countenance had all the regularity of a Grecian head j and 
his blue eyes, shaded by very long, dark eyelashes, were 
soft, yet full of expression. When he looked up, the 
heavy lids, as it were, unveiled the gentle light beneath, 
and then again closed over them, as shading what was 
too brilliant to behold. His lips expressed the deepest 
sensibility, and something perhaps of timidity, had not 
the placid confidence of his demeanour forbidden such 
an idea. 



120 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

His host and hostess were at first silent ; but he asked 
some natural questions about the buildings of their city, 
and by degrees led them into discourse. When mid-day 
struck, Cincolo looked towards his pot of minestra, and 
Ricciardo followed his look, asked if that was not 
the dinner. "You must entertain me," he said, "for I 
have not eaten to-day." A table was drawn near the 
window, and the minestra, poured out into one plate, was 
placed in the middle of it, a spoon was given to each, and 
a jug of wine filled from a barrel. Ricciardo looked at 
the two old people, and seemed somewhat to smile at the 
idea of eating from the same plate with them j he ate, 
however, though sparingly, and drank of the wine, 
though with still greater moderation. Cincolo, however, 
under pretence of serving his guest, filled his jug a second 
time, and was about to rise for the third measure, when 
Ricciardo, placing his small white hand on his arm, said, 
" Are you a German, my friend, that you cease not after 
so many draughts 1 I have heard that you Florentines 
were a sober people." 

Cincolo was not much pleased with this reproof, but he 
felt that it was timely ; so, conceding the point, he sat 
down again, and, somewhat heated with what he had 
already drank, he asked his guest the news from Germany, 
and what hopes for the good cause ? Gegia bridled at 
these words, and Ricciardo replied, " Many reports arc 
abroad, and high hopes entertained, especially in the north 
of Italy, for the success of our expedition. Corradino 
is arrived at Genoa, and it is hoped that, although the 
ranks of his army were much thinned by the desertion 
of his German troops, they will be quickly filled by 
Italians, braver and truer than those foreigners, who, 
strangers to our soil, could not fight for his cause witli 
our ardour ? " 

" And how does he bear himself 1 " 

"As beseems one of the house of Swabia, and the 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 121 

nephew of Manfred. He is inexperienced and young. 
He is not more than sixteen. His mother would hardly 
consent to this expedition, but wept at the fear of all he 
might endure ; for he has been nursed in every luxury, 
and habituated to the tender care of a woman, who, 
although she be a princess, has waited on him with 
anxious solicitude. But Corradino is of good heart ; 
docile, but courageous; obedient to his wiser friends, 
gentle to his inferiors, but noble of soul, the spirit of 
Manfred seems to animate his unfolding mind; and 
surely, if that glorious prince now enjoys the reward of 
his surpassing virtues, he looks down with joy and appro 
bation on him who is, I trust, destined to fill his throne." 

The enthusiasm with which Eicciardo spoke suffused 
his pale countenance with a slight blush, while his eyes 
swam in the lustre of the dew that filled them. Gegia 
was little pleased with this harangue, but curiosity kept 
her silent, while her husband proceeded to question his 
guest. " You seem to be well acquainted with Corradino 1 " 

11 1 saw him at Milan, and was closely connected with 
his most intimate friend there. As I have said, he has 
arrived at Genoa, and perhaps has even now landed at 
Pisa; he will find many friends in that town. Every 
man there will be his friend ; but during his journey 
southward he will have to contend with our Florentine 
army, commanded by the Marshals of the usurper Charles, 
and assisted by his troops. Charles himself has left us, 
and is gone to Naples to prepare for this war. But he is 
detested there, as a tyrant and a robber, and Corradino 
will be received in the Regno as a saviour ; so that if he 
once surmount the obstacles which oppose his entrance, 
I do not doubt his success, and trust that he will be 
crowned within a month at Rome, and the week after sit 
on the throne of his ancestors in Naples." 

"And who will crown him ? " cried Gegia, unable to 
contain herself. " Italy contains no heretic base enough 



122 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

to do such a deed, unless it be a Jew ; or he send to 
Constantinople for a Greek, or to Egypt for a Moham 
medan. Cursed may the race of the Frederics ever be ! 
Thrice cursed one who has affinity to the miscreant 
Manfred ! And little do you please me, young man, 
by holding such discourse in my house." 

Cincolo looked at Eicciardo, as if he feared that so 
violent a partisan for the house of Swabia would be 
irritated at his wife s attack ; but he was looking on the 
aged woman with a regard of the most serene benignity ; 
no contempt even was mingled with the gentle smile that 
played rcund his lips. " I will restrain myself," he said, 
and, turning to Cincolo, he conversed on more general 
subjects, describing the various cities of Italy that he had 
visited ; discussing their modes of government, and relat 
ing anecdotes concerning their inhabitants, with an air of 
experience that, contrasted with his youthful appearance, 
greatly impressed Cincolo, who looked on him at once 
with admiration and respect. Evening came on. The 
sound of bells died away after the Ave Maria had ceased 
to ring, but the distant sound of music was wafted to 
them by the night air. Ricciardo was about to address 
Cincolo, when a knocking at the gate interrupted him. 
It was Buzeccha, the Saracen, a famous chess-player, who 
was used to parade about under the colonnades of the 
Duomo, and challenge the young nobles to play; and 
sometimes much stress was laid on these games, and the 
gain and loss became the talk of Florence. Buzeccha was 
a tall and ungainly man, with all that good-natured 
consequence of manner which the fame he had acquired 
by his proficiency in so trifling a science, and the 
familiarity with which he was permitted to treat those 
superior to him in rank, who were pleased to measure 
their forces with him, might well bestow. He was begin 
ning with " Eh, Messere ! " when perceiving Ricciardo, 
he cried, " Who have we here 1 " 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 123 

" A friend to good men," replied Eicciardo, smiling. 

" Then, by Mahomet, thou art my friend, my stripling. 

"Thou shouldst be a Saracen, by thy speech?" said 
Kicciardo. 

" And through the help of the Prophet, so am I. One 
who in Manfred s time but no more of that. We won t 
talk of Manfred, eh, Monna Gegia ? I am Buzeccha, the 
chess-player, at your service, Messer lo Forestiere." 

The introduction thus made, they began to talk of the 
procession of the day. After a while, Buzeccha introduced 
his favourite subject of chess-playing ; he recounted some 
wonderfully good strokes he had achieved, and related to 
Eicciardo how before the Palagio del Popolo, in the 
presence of Count Guido Novelle de Giudi, then Vicare 
of the city, he had played an hour at three chess-boards 
with three of the best chess-players in Florence, playing 
two by memory and one by sight ; and out of three games 
which made the board, he had won two. This account 
was wound up by a proposal to play with his host. 
" Thou art a hard-headed fellow, Cincolo, and make better 
play than the nobles. I would swear that thou thinkest 
of chess only as thou cobblest thy shoes ; every hole of 
your awl is a square of the board, every stitch a move, 
and a finished pair paid for checkmate to your adversary ; 
eh, Cincolo ? Bring out the field of battle, man." 

Eicciardo interposed : " I leave Florence in two hours, 
and before I go, Messer Cincolo promised to conduct me 
to the Piazza del Duomo" 

" Plenty of time, good youth," cried Buzeccha, arranging 
his men ; " I only claim one game, and my games never 
last more than a quarter of an hour ; and then we will 
both escort you, and you shall dance a set into the 
bargain with a black-eyed houri, all Nazarine as thou art. 
So stand out of my light, good youth, and shut the 
window, if you have heeding, that the torch flare not so." 

Eicciardo seemed amused by the authoritative tone of 



124 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

the chess-pln3 T er ; he shut the window and trimmed the 
torch which, stuck against the wall, was the only light 
they had, and stood by the table, overlooking the game. 
Monna Gegia had replaced the pot for supper, and sat 
somewhat uneasily, as if she were displeased that her 
guest did not talk with her. Cincolo and Buzeccha were 
deeply intent on their game, when a knock was heard at 
the door. Cincolo was about to rise and open it, but 
Ricciardo saying, "Do not disturb yourself," opened it 
himself, with the manner of one w r ho does humble offices 
as if ennobling them, so that no one action can be more 
humble to them than another. 

The visitant was welcomed by Gegia alone, with "Ah ! 
Messer Beppe, this is kind, on May Day night." 

Ricciardo glanced slightly on him, and then resumed 
his stand by the players. There was little in Messer 
Beppe to attract a favourable regard. He was short, 
thin, and dry j his face long - drawn and liny ; his 
eyes deep-set and scowling, his lips straight, his nose 
hooked, and his head covered by a close skull-cap, his 
hair cut close all round. He sat down near Gegia, and 
began to discourse in a whining, servile, voice, compli 
menting her on her good looks, launching forth into 
praise of the magnificence of certain Guelph Florentines, 
and concluded by declaring that he was hungry and tired. 

" Hungry, Beppe 1 " said Gegia, " that should have been 
your first word, friend. Cincolo, wilt thou give thy guest 
to eat 1 Cincolo, art thou deaf ? Art thou blind 1 Dost 
thou not hear 1 Wilt thou not see 1 Here is Messer 
Giuseppe de Bosticchi." 

Cincolo slowly, his eyes still fixed on the board, was 
about to rise. But the name of the visitant seemed to 
have the effect of magic on Ricciardo. 

" Bosticchi ! " he cried " Giuseppe Bosticchi ! I did 
not expect to find that man beneath thy roof, Cincolo, all 
Guolph as thy wife is ; for she also has eaten of the bread 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 125 

of Elisei. Farewell ! tliou wilb lind me in the street 
below ; follow me quickly." 

He was about to go, but Bosticchi placed himself before 
the door, saying in a tone whose whine expressed mingled 
rage and servility, " In what have I offended this young 
gentleman 1 Will he not tell me my offence 1 " 

"Dare not to stop my way," cried Eicciardo, passing 
his hand before his eyes, " nor force me again to look on 
tlice. Begone ! " 

Cincolo stopped him. "Thou art too hasty, and far 
too passionate, my noble guest," said he ; " however this 
man may have offended thee, thou art too violent." 

" Violent ! " cried Ricciardo, almost suffocated by pas 
sionate emotion. " Ay, draw thy knife, and show the 
blood of Arrigo dei Elisei, with which it is still stained." 

A dead silence followed. Bosticchi slunk out of the 
room ; Ricciardo hid his face in his hands and wept. 
But soon he calmed his passion, and said : " This is 
indeed childish. Pardon me ; that man is gone ; excuse 
and forget my violence. Resume thy game, Cincolo, but 
conclude it quickly, for time gains on us. Hark ! an hour 
of night sounds from the Campanile." 

"The game is already concluded," said Buzeccha sorrow 
fully ; " thy cloak overthrew the best checkmate this head 
ever planned so God forgive thee ! " 

" Checkmate ! " cried the indignant Cincolo " Check 
mate ! and my queen mowing you down, rank and file ! " 

" Let us begone ! " exclaimed Ricciardo. " Messer 
Buzeccha, you will play out your game with Monna 
Gegia. Cincolo will return ere long. So taking his host 
by the arm, he drew him out of the room, and descended 
the narrow high stairs with the air of one to whom 
those stairs were not unknown. 

When in the street he slackened his pace, and, first 
looking round to assure himself that none overheard their 
conversation, he addressed Cincolo : Pardon me, my 



126 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

dear friend ; I am hasty, and the sight of that man made 
every drop of my blood cry aloud in my veins. But I do 
not come here to indulge in private sorrows or private 
revenge, and my design ought alone to engross me. It is 
necessary for me to see speedily and secretly Messcr 
Guielmo Lostendardo, the Neapolitan commander. I bear 
a message to him from the Countess Elizabeth, the mother 
of Corradino, and I have some hope that its import may 
induce him to take at least a neutral part during the 
impending conflict. I have chosen you, Cincolo, to aid me 
in this, for not only you are of that little note in your 
town that you may act for me without attracting observa 
tion, but you are brave and true, and I may confide to 
your known worth. Lostendardo resides at the Palagio 
del Governo. When I enter its doors I am in the hands 
of my enemies, and its dungeons may alone know the 
secret of my destiny. I hope better things. But if after 
two hours I do not appear or let you hear of my welfare, 
carry this packet to Corradino at Pisa. You will then 
learn who I am ; and if you feel any indignation at my 
fate, let that feeling attach you still more strongly to the 
cause for which I live and die." 

As Kicciardo spoke, he still walked on, and Cincolo 
observed that, without his guidance, he directed his steps 
towards the Palagio del Governo. 

"I do not understand this," said the old man. "By 
what argument, unless you bring one from the other 
world, do you hope to induce Messer Guielmo to aid 
Corradino 1 He is so bitter an enemy of Manfred, that 
although that prince is dead, yet when he mentions his 
name he grasps the air as it were a dagger. I have heard 
him with horrible imprecations curse the whole house of 
Swabia." 

A tremor shook the frame of Kicciardo, but he replied, 
" Lostendardo was once the firmest support of that house, 
and the friend of Manfred. Strange circumstances gave 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 127 

birth in his mind to this unnatural hatred, and he became 
a traitor. But, perhaps, now that Manfred is in Paradise, 
the youth, the virtues, and the inexperience of Corradino 
may inspire him with more generous feelings, and re 
awaken his ancient faith. At least I must make this 
last trial. This cause is too holy, too sacred, to admit of 
common forms of reasoning or action. The nephew of 
Manfred must sit upon the throne of his ancestors ; and 
to achieve that I will endure what I am about to endure." 

They entered the palace ; Messer Guielmo was carous 
ing in the great hall. 

"Bear this ring to him, good Cincolo, and say that I 
wait. Be speedy, that my courage, my life, do not desert 
me at the moment of trial." 

Cincolo, casting one more inquisitive glance on his 
extraordinary companion, obeyed his orders, while the 
youth leant against one of the pillars of the court and 
passionately cast up his eyes to the clear firmament. 

"Oh, ye stars!" he cried in a smothered voice, "ye 
are eternal; let my purpose, my will, be as constant as 
ye!" 

Then, more calm, he folded his arms in his cloak, and 
with strong inward struggle endeavoured to repress his 
emotion. Several servants approached him, and bade 
him follow them. Again he looked at the sky and said, 
"Manfred," and then he walked on with slow but firm 
steps. They led him through several halls and corridors 
to a large apartment hung with tapestry, and well lighted 
by numerous torches; the marble of the floor reflected 
their glare, and the arched roof echoed the footsteps of 
one who paced the apartment as Ricciardo entered. It 
was Lostendardo. He made a sign that the servants 
should retire ; the heavy door closed behind them, and 
Kicciardo stood alone with Messer Guielmo ; his counte 
nance pale but composed, his eyes cast down as in expecta 
tion, not iii fear ; and but for the convulsive motion of 



128 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

his lips, you would have guessed that every faculty was 
almost suspended by intense agitation. 

Lostendardo approached. He was a man in the prime 
of life, tall and athletic ; he seemed capable with a single 
exertion to crush the frail being of Kicciardo. Every 
feature of his countenance spoke of the struggle of 
passions, and the terrible egotism of one who would 
sacrifice even himself to the establishment of his will : 
his black eyebrows were scattered, his grey eyes deep set 
and scowling, his look at once stern and haggard. A 
smile seemed never to have disturbed the settled scorn 
which his lips expressed; his high forehead, already 
becoming bald, was marked by a thousand contradictory 
lines. His voice was studiously restrained as he said : 
" Wherefore do you bring that ring ? " 

Ricciardo looked up and met his eye, which glanced fire 
as he exclaimed, " Despina ! " He seized her hand with 
a giant s grasp : " I have prayed for this night and day, 
and thou art now here ! Nay, do not struggle ; you are 
mine ; for by my salvation I swear that thou shalt never 
again escape me." 

Despina replied calmly: "Thou mayest well believe 
that in thus placing myself in thy power I do not dread 
any injury thou canst inflict upon me, or I were not here. 
I do not fear thee, for I do not fear death. Loosen then 
thy hold, and listen to me. I come in the name of those 
virtues that were once thine ; I come in the name of all 
noble sentiment, generosity, and ancient faith, and I trust 
that in listening to me your heroic nature will second my 
voice, and that Lostendardo will no longer rank with 
those whom the good and great never name but to 
condemn." 

Lostendardo appeared to attend little to what she said. 
He gazed on her with triumph and malignant pride ; and 
if he still held her his motive appeared rather the delight 
he felt in displaying his power over her, than any fear 



A TALE OF TI1E PASSIONS. 129 

that she would escape. You might read in her pale 
check and glazed eye, that if she feared, it was herself 
alone that she mistrusted; that her design lifted her 
above mortal dread, and that she was as impassive as the 
marble she resemhled to any event that did not either 
advance or injure the object for which she came. They 
were both silent, until Lostendardo leading her to a seat, 
and then standing opposite to her, his arms folded, every 
feature dilated by triumph, and his voice sharpened by 
agitation, he said : " Well, speak ! What wouldst thou 
with me t \ " 

" I come to request, that if you cannot be induced to 
assist Prince Corradino in the present struggle, you will, 
at least, stand neutral, and not oppose his advance to the 
kingdom of his ancestors." 

Lostendardo laughed. The vaulted roof repeated the 
sound, but the harsh echo, though it resembled the sharp 
cry of an animal of prey whose paw is on the heart of its 
enemy, was not so discordant and dishuman as the laugh 
itself. " How," he asked, " dost thou pretend to induce 
me to comply ? This dagger " and he touched the hilt of 
one that was half concealed in his vesture " is yet stained 
by the blood of Manfred ; ere long it will be sheathed in 
the heart of that foolish boy." 

Dcspina conquered the feeling of horror these words 
inspired, and replied : " Will you give a few minutes 
patient hearing ? ; 

" I will give you a few minutes hearing, and if I be 
not so patient as in the Palagio Reale, fair Despina must 
excuse me. Forbearance is not a virtue to which I 
aspire." 

"Yes, it was in the Palagio Reale at Naples, the 
palace of Manfred, that you first saw me. You were 
then the bosom friend of Manfred, selected by him as his 
confidant and counsellor. Why did you become a traitor? 
Start not at that word : if you could hear the united 



130 JIARY W. SHELLEY. 

voice of Italy, and even of those who call themselves 
your friends, they would echo that name. Why did you 
thus degrade and belie yourself ? You call me the cause, 
yet I am most innocent. You saw me at the Court of 
your master, an attendant on Queen Sibilla, and one who, 
unknown to herself, had already parted with her heart, 
her soul, her will, her entire being, an involuntary 
sacrifice at the shrine of all that is noble and divine in 
human nature. My spirit worshipped Manfred as a saint, 
and my pulses ceased to beat when his eye fell upon me. 
I felt this, but I knew it not. You awoke me from my 
dream. You said that you loved me, and you reflected in 
too faithful a mirror my own emotions : I saw myself and 
shuddered. But the profound and eternal nature of 
my passion saved me. I loved Manfred. I loved the sun 
because it enlightened him ; I loved the air that fed him ; 
I deified m}-self, for that my heart was the temple in 
which he resided. I devoted myself to Sibilla, for she 
was his wife, and never in thought or dream degraded the 
purity of my affection towards him. For this you hated 
him. He was ignorant of my passion : my heart con 
tained it as a treasure, which you having discovered came 
to rifle. You could more easily deprive me of life than 
my devotion for your king, and therefore you were a 
traitor. Manfred died, and you thought that I had then 
forgotten him. But love would indeed be a mockery if 
death were not the most barefaced cheat. How can he 
die who is immortalized in my thoughts my thoughts, 
that comprehend the universe, and contain eternity in 
their graspingsl What though his earthly vesture is 
thrown as a despised weed beside the verde, he lives in 
my soul as lovely, as noble, as entire, as when his voice 
awoke the mute air ; nay, his life is more entire, more 
true. For before, that small shrine that encased his spirit 
was all that existed of him ; but now, he is a part of 
all things ; his spirit surrounds me, interpenetrates ; and 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 131 

divided from him during his life, his death has united me 
to him for ever." 

The countenance of Lostendardo darkened fearfully. 
When she paused, he looked black as the sea before the 
heavily charged thunder-clouds that canopy it dissolve 
themselves into rain. The tempest of passion that arose 
in his heart seemed too mighty to admit of swift 
manifestation; it came slowly up from the profoundest 
depths of his soul, and emotion was piled upon emotion 
before the lightning of his anger sped to its destination. 
" Your arguments, eloquent Despina," he said, " are 
indeed unanswerable. They work well for your purpose. 
Corradino is, I hear, at Pisa : you have sharpened my 
dagger; and before the air of another night rust it, I 
may, by deeds, have repaid your insulting words." 

" How far do you mistake me ! And is praise and 
love of all heroic excellence insult to you 1 Lostendardo, 
when you first knew me, I was an inexperienced girl ; I 
loved, but knew not what love was, and circumscribing 
my passion in narrow bounds, I adored the being of 
Manfred as I might love an effigy of stone, which, when 
broken, has no longer an existence. I am now much 
altered. I might before have treated you with disdain 
or anger, but now these base feelings have expired in 
my heart. I am animated but by one feeling an 
aspiration to another life, another state of being. All 
the good depart from this strange earth ; and I doubt 
not that when I am sufficiently elevated above human 
weaknesses, it will also be my turn to leave this scene of 
woe. I prepare myself for that moment alone ; and in 
endeavouring to fit myself for a union with all the brave, 
generous, and wise, that once adorned humanity, and 
have now passed from it, I consecrate myself to the 
service of this most righteous cause. You wrong me, 
therefore, if you think there is aught of disdain in what 
1 say, or that any degrading feelings are mingled with 



132 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

my devotion of spirit when I come and voluntarily place 
myself in your power. You can imprison me for ever in 
the dungeons of this palace, as a returned Ghibellinc and 
spy, and have me executed as a criminal. But before 
you do this, pause for your own sake ; reflect on the 
choice of glory or ignominy that you are now about to 
make. Let your old sentiments of love for the house of 
Swabia have some sway in your heart ; reflect, that as 
you are the despised enemy, so you may become the 
chosen friend of its last descendant, and receive from 
every heart the .praise of having restored Corradino to 
the honours and power to which he was born. Compare 
this prince to the hypocritical, the bloody and mean-spirited 
Charles. When Manfred died I went to Germany, and 
have resided at the court of the Countess Elizabeth; I 
have therefore been an hourly witness of the great and 
good qualities of Corradino. The bravery of his spirit 
makes him rise above the weakness of youth and inex 
perience; he possesses all the nobility of spirit that 
belongs to the family of Swabia, and, in addition, a 
purity and gentleness that attracts the respect and love of 
the old and wary courtiers of Frederic and Conrad. You 
are brave, and would be generous, did not the fury of 
your passions, like a consuming fire, destroy in their 
violence every generous sentiment : how then can you 
become the tool of Chariest His scowling eyes and 
sneering lips betoken the selfishness of his mind. Avarice, 
cruelty, meanness, and artifice are the qualities that 
characterize him, and render him unworthy of the majesty 
he usurps. Let him return to Provence, and reign with 
paltry despotism over the luxurious and servile Trench ; 
the free-born Italians require another lord. They are 
not fit to bow to one whose palace is the change-house of 
money-lenders, whose generals are usurers, whose courtiers 
are milliners or monks, and who basely vows allegiance 
to the enemy of freedom and virtue, Clement, the 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 133 

murderer of Manfred. Their king, like them, should 
bo clothed in the armour of valour and simplicity ; his 
ornaments, his shield and spear ; his treasury, the posses 
sions of his subjects ; his army, their unshaken lover. 
Charles will treat you as a tool ; Corradino as a friend. 
Charles will make you the detested tyrant of a groaning 
province ; Corradino, the governor of a prosperous and 
happy people. I cannot tell by your manner if what I 
have said has in any degree altered your determination. 
I cannot forget the scenes that passed between us at 
Naples. I might then have been disdainful ; I am not 
so now. Your execrations of Manfred excited every 
angry feeling in my mind ; but, as I have said, all but 
the feeling of love expired in my heart when Manfred 
died, and methinks that where love is, excellence must 
be its companion. You said you loved me ; and though, 
in other times, that love was twin-brother to hate, 
though then, poor prisoner in your heart, jealousy, rage, 
contempt, and cruelty, were its handmaids, yet if it 
were love, methinks that its divinity must have purified 
your heart from baser feelings ; and now that I, the bride 
of Death, am removed from your sphere, gentler feelings 
may awaken in your bosom, and you may incline mildly 
to my voice. If indeed you loved me, will you not now 
be my friend ? Shall we not hand in hand pursue the 
same career 1 Return to your ancient faith ; and now 
that death and religion have placed the seal upon the 
past, let Manfred s spirit, looking down, behold his 
repentant friend the firm ally of his successor, the best 
and last scion of the house of Swabia." 

She ceased; for the glare of savage triumph which, 
as a rising fire at night-time, enlightened with growing 
and fearful radiance the face of Lostendardo, made her 
pause in her appeal. He did not reply ; but when she 
was silent he quitted the attitude in which he had stood 
immovably opposite to her, and pacing the hall witli 



134 MARY W. SIIELT.EY. 

measured steps, his head declined, he seemed to ruminate 
on some project. Could it be that he weighed her 
reasonings 1 If he hesitated, the side of generosity and 
old fidelity would certainly prevail. Yet she dared not 
hope ; her heart beat fast ; she would have knelt, but 
she feared to move, lest any motion should disturb his 
thoughts, and curb the flow of good feeling which she 
fondly hoped had arisen within him : she looked up and 
prayed silently as she sat. Notwithstanding the glare of 
the torches, the beams of one small star struggled through 
the dark window pane; her eye resting on it, her 
thoughts were at once elevated to the eternity and space 
which that star symbolized ; it seemed to her the spirit 
of Manfred, and she inwardly worshipped it, as she 
prayed that it would shed its benign influence on the 
soul of Lostendardo. 

Some minutes elapsed in this fearful silence, and then 
he approached her. "Despina, allow me to reflect on 
your words ; to-morrow I will answer you. You will 
remain in this palace until the morning, and then you 
shall see and judge of my repentance and returning faith." 

Ho spoke with studious gentleness. Despina could 
not see his face, for the lights shone behind him. When 
she looked up to reply, the little star twinkled just above 
his head, and seemed with its gentle lustre to reassure 
her. Our minds, when highly wrought, are strangely 
given to superstition, and Despina lived in a superstitious 
age. She thought that the star bade her comply, and 
assured her of protection from Heaven ; from where 
else could she expect it ? She said, therefore, " I consent. 
Only let me request that you acquaint the man who gave 
you my ring that I am safe, or he will fear for me." 

" I will do as you desire." 

"And I will confide myself to your care. I cannot, 
dare not, fear you. If you would betray me, still I trust 
in the heavenly saints that guard humanity." 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 135 

Her countenance was so calm, it beamed with so 
angelic a self-devotion and a belief in good, that Losten- 
dardo dared not look on her. For one moment as she, 
having ceased to speak, gazed upon the star he felt 
impelled to throw himself at her feet, to confess the 
diabolical scheme he had forged, and to commit himself 
body and soul to her guidance, to obey, to serve, to 
worship her. The impulse was momentary ; the feeling 
of revenge returned on him. From the moment she 
had rejected him, the fire of rage had burned in his 
heart, consuming all healthy feeling, all human sym 
pathies, and gentleness of soul. He had sworn never to 
sleep on a bed, or to drink aught but water, until his 
first cup of wine was mingled with the blood of Manfred. 
He had fulfilled this vow. A strange alteration had 
worked within him from the moment he had drained 
that unholy cup. The spirit, not of a man, but of a 
devil, seemed to live within him, urging him to crime, 
from which his long protracted hope of more complete 
revenge had alone deterred him. But Despina was now in 
his power, and it seemed to him as if fate had preserved 
him so long only that he might now wreak his full rage 
upon her. When she spoke of love, he thought how 
from that he might extract pain. He formed his plan ; 
and this slight human weakness now conquered, he bent 
his thoughts to its completion. Yet he feared to stay 
longer with her ; so he quitted her, saying that he would 
send attendants who would show her an apartment where 
she might repose. He left her, and several hours passed ; 
but no one came. The torches burnt low, and the stars 
of heaven could now with twinkling beams conquer their 
feebler light. One by one these torches went out, and 
the shadows of the high windows of the hall, before 
invisible, were thrown upon its marble pavement. 
Despina looked upon the shade, at first unconsciously, 
until she found herself counting one, two, three, the 



136 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

shapes of the iron bars that lay so placidly on the stone. 
" Those grates are thick," she said ; " this room would 
be a large but secure dungeon." As by inspiration, she 
now felt that she was a prisoner. No change, no word, 
had intervened since she had walked fearlessly in the 
room, believing herself free. But now no doubt of her 
situation occurred to her mind ; heavy chains seemed to 
fall around her ; the air to feel thick and heavy as that 
of a prison ; and the star-beams that had before cheered 
her, became the dreary messengers of fearful danger to 
herself, and of the utter defeat of all the hopes she had 
dared nourish of success to her beloved cause. 

Cincolo waited, first with impatience, and then with 
anxiety, for the return of the youthful stranger. He 
paced up and down before the gates of the palace ; hour 
after hour passed on ; the stars arose and descended, and 
ever and anon meteors shot along the sky. They were 
not more frequent than they always are during a clear 
summer night in Italy; but they appeared strangely 
numerous to Cincolo, and portentous of change and 
calamity. Midnight struck, and at that moment a pro 
cession of monks passed, bearing a corpse and chanting 
a solemn De Profundis. Cincolo felt a cold tremor 
shake his limbs when he reflected how ill an augury this 
was for the strange adventurer he had guided to that 
palace. The sombre cowls of the priests, their hollow 
voices, and the dark burden they carried, augmented 
his agitation even to terror. Without confessing the 
cowardice to himself, he was possessed with fear lest he 
should be included in the evil destiny that evidently 
awaited his companion. Cincolo was a brave man ; he 
had often been foremost in a perilous assault; but the 
most courageous among us sometimes feel our hearts fail 
within us at the dread of unknown and fated danger. 
He was struck with panic ; he looked after the disap 
pearing lights of the procession, and listened to their 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 137 

fading voices ; his knees shook, a cold perspiration stood 
on his brow ; until, unable to resist the impulse, he began 
slowly to withdraw himself from the Palace of Govern 
ment, and to quit the circle of danger which seemed to 
hedge him in if he remained on that spot. 

He had hardly quitted his post by the gate of the 
palace, when he saw lights issue from it, attendant on a 
company of men, some of whom were armed, as appeared 
from the reflection their lances heads cast ; and some of 
them carried a litter, hung with black and closely drawn. 
Cincolo was rooted to the spot. He could not render 
himself any reason for his belief, but he felt convinced 
that the stranger youth was there, about to be carried out 
to death. Impelled by curiosity and anxiety, he followed 
the party as they went towards the Porta Romana : they 
were challenged by the sentinels at the gate ; they gave 
the word and passed. Cincolo dared not follow, but he 
was agitated by fear and compassion. He remembered 
the packet confided to his care ; he dared not draw it 
from his bosom, lest any Guelph should be near to 
overlook and discover that it was addressed to Corradino ; 
he could not read, but ho wished to look at the arms of 
the seal, to see whether they bore the imperial ensigns. 
He returned back to the Palagio del Governo : all there 
was dark and silent ; he walked up and down before the 
gates, looking up at the windows, but no sign of life 
appeared. He could not tell why he was thus agitated, 
but he felt as if all his future peace depended on the fate 
of this stranger youth. He thought of Gegia, her help 
lessness and age ; but he could not resist the impulse that 
impelled him, and he resolved that very night to com 
mence his journey to Pisa, to deliver the packet, to 
learn who the stranger was, and what hopes he might 
entertain for his safety. 

He returned home, that he might inform Gegia of his 
journey. This was a painful task, but he could not leave 



138 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

her in doubt. He ascended his narrow stairs with trepida 
tion. At the head of them a lamp twinkled before a 
picture of the Virgin. Evening after evening it burnt 
there, guarding through its influence his little household 
from all earthly or supernatural dangers. The sight of it 
inspired him with courage ; he said an Ave Maria before 
it ; and then looking around him to assure himself that 
no spy stood on the narrow landing-place, he drew the 
packet from his bosom and examined the seal. All 
Italians in those days were conversant in heraldry, since 
from ensigns of the shields of the knights they learned, 
better than from their faces or persons, to what family 
and party they belonged. But it required no great 
knowledge for Cincolo to decipher these arms; he had 
known them from his childhood ; they were those of the 
Elisei, the family to whom he had been attached as a 
partisan during all these civil contests. Arrigo de Elisei 
had been his patron, and his wife had nursed his only 
daughter, in those happy days when there was neither 
Guelph nor Ghibelline. The sight of these arms re 
awakened all his anxiety. Could this youth belong to 
that house 1 ? The seal showed that he really did; and 
this discovery confirmed his determination of making 
every exertion to save him, and inspired him with 
sufficient courage to encounter the remonstrances and 
fears of Monua Gegia. 

He unlocked his door ; the old dame was asleep in her 
chair, but awoke as he entered. She had slept only to 
refresh her curiosity, and she asked a thousand questions 
in a breath, to which Cincolo did not reply : he stood 
with his arms folded looking at the fire, irresolute how to 
break the subject of his departure. Monna Gegia con 
tinued to talk. 

"After you went, we held a consultation concerning 
this hot-brained youth of this morning : I, Buzeccha, 
Beppe de Bosticchi who returned, and Monna Lissa from 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 139 

the Mercato Xuovo. We all agreed that he must be one 
of two persons ; and be it one or the other, if he have 
not quitted Florence, the Stinchi 1 will be his habitation 
by sunrise. Eh, Cincolo, in an ! you do not speak ; whore 
did you part with your prince 1 " 

" Prince, Gegia ! Are you mad ? what prince 1 " 
" Nay, he is either a prince or a baker ; either 
Corradino himself, or Kicciardo, the son of Messer 
Tommaso de Manelli ; he that lived o th Arno, and 
baked for all that Sesto, when Count Guido de Giudi was 
Vicario. By this token, that Messer Tommaso went to 
Milan with Ubaldo de Gargalandi, and Kicciardo, who 
went with his father, must now be sixteen. He had the 
fame of kneading with as light a hand as his father, but 
he liked better to follow arms with the Gargalandi. He 
was a fair, likely youth, they said; and so, to say the 
truth, was our youngster of this morning. But Monna 
Lissa will have it that it must be Corradino himself." 

Cincolo listened as if the gossip of two old women 
could unravel his riddle. He even began to doubt 
whether the last conjecture, extravagant as it was, had 
not hit the truth. Every circumstance forbade such an 
idea ; but he thought of the youth and exceeding beauty 
of the stranger, and he began to doubt. There was none 
among the Elisei who answered to his appearance. The 
flower of their youth had fallen at Monte Aperto ; the 
eldest of the new generation was but ten ; the other males 
of that house were of a mature age. Gegia continued to 
talk of the anger that Beppe de Bosticchi evinced at 
being accused of the murder of Arrigo de Elisei. " I f he 
had done that deed," she cried, " never more should he 
have stood on my hearth ; but he swore his innocence ; 
and truly, poor man, it would be a sin not to believe 
him." Why, if the stranger were not an Elisei, should 
he have shown such horror on viewing the supposed 
1 The name of the common prison at Florence. 



140 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

murderer of the head of that family? Cincolo turned 
from the fire ; he examined whether his knife hung 
safely in his girdle, and he exchanged his sandal-like 
shoes for stronger boots of common undressed fur. This 
last act attracted the attentions of Gegia. 

"What are you about, good man?" she cried. "This 
is no hour to change your dress, but to come to bed. 
To-night you will not speak ; but to-morrow I hope to get 
it all out from you. What are you about 1 " 

" I am about to leave you, my dear Gegia ; and Heaven 
bless and take care of you ! I am going to Pisa." 

Gegia uttered a shriek, and was about to remonstrate 
with great volubility, while the tears rolled down her 
aged cheeks. Tears also filled the eyes of Cincolo, as he 
said, " I do not go for the cause you suspect. I do not 
go into the army of Corradino, though my heart will be 
with it. I go but to carry a letter, and will return with 
out delay." 

" You will never return," cried the old woman : " the 
Commune will never let you enter the gates of this town 
again, if you set foot in that traitorous Pisa. But you 
shall not go ; I will raise the neighbours ; I will declare 
you mad " 

" Gegia, no more of this ! Here is all the money I 
have. Before I go, I will send your Cousin Nunziata 
to you. I must go. It is not the Ghibelline cause, or 
Corradino, that obliges me to risk your ease and comforts ; 
but the life of one of the Elisei is at stake ; and if I can 
save him, would you have me rest here, and afterwards 
curse you and the hour when I was born ? " 

" What ! is he 1 But no; there is none among the 

Elisei so young as he ; and none so lovely, except her 
whom these arms carried when an infant but she is a 
female. No, no ; this is a tale trumped up to deceive me 
and gain my consent ; but you shall never have it. Mind 
that ! you will never have it ! and I prophesy that if you 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 141 

do go, your journey will be the death of both of us." 
She wept bitterly. Cincolo kissed her aged cheek, and 
mingled his tears with hers ; and then recommending her 
to the care of the Virgin and the saints, he quitted her ; 
while grief choked her utterance, the name of the Elisei 
had deprived her of all energy to resist his purpose. 

It was four in the morning before the gates of Florence 
were opened and Cincolo could leave the city. At first 
he availed himself of the carts of the contadinl to advance 
on his journey ; but as he drew near Pisa, all modes of 
conveyance ceased, and he was obliged to take by-roads, 
and act cautiously, not to fall into the hands of the 
Florentine outposts, or of some fierce Ghibelline, who 
might suspect him, and have him carried before the 
Podesta of the village ; for if once suspected and searched, 
the packet addressed to Corradino would convict him, 
and he would pay for his temerity with his life. Having 
arrived at Vico Pisano, he found a troop of Pisan horse 
there on guard ; he was known to many of the soldiers, 
and he obtained a conveyance for Pisa ; but it was night 
before he arrived. He gave the Ghibelline watchword, 
and was admitted within the gates. He asked for Prince 
Corradino : he was in the city, at the palace of the 
Lanfranchi. He crossed the Arno, and was admitted 
into the palace by the soldiers who guarded the door. 

Corradino had just returned from a successful skirmish 
in the Lucchese states, and was reposing; but when 
Count Ghcrardo Doneratico, his principal attendant, saw 
the seal of the packet, he immediately ushered the bearer 
into a small room, where the prince lay on a fox s skin 
thrown upon the pavement. The mind of Cincolo had 
been so bewildered by the rapidity of the events of the 
preceding night, by fatigue and want of sleep, that he 
had overwrought himself to believe that the stranger 
youth was indeed Corradino ; and when he had heard 
that that prince was in Pisa, by a strange disorder of 



142 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

ideas he still imagined that he and Ricciardo were the 
same ; that the black litter was a phantom, and his fears 
ungrounded. The first sight of Corradino, his fair hair 
and round Saxon features, destroyed this idea : it was re 
placed by a feeling of deep anguish, when Count Gherardo, 
announcing him, said, " One who brings a letter from 
Madonna Despina dei Elisei, waits upon your Highness." 

The old man sprang forward, uncontrolled by the 
respect he would otherwise have felt for one of so high 
lineage as Corradino. " From Despina ! Did you say 
from her 1 Oh ! unsay your words ! Not from my 
beloved, lost foster-child." 

Tears rolled down his cheeks. Corradino, a youth of 
fascinating gentleness, attempted to reassure him. "Oh ! 
my gracious Lord," cried Cincolo, " open that packet, and 
see if it be from my blessed child if in the disguise of 
Bicciardo I led her to destruction." He wrung his hands. 
Corradino, pale as death with fear for the destiny of 
his lovely and adventurous friend, broke the seal. The 
packet contained an inner envelope without any direction, 
and a letter, which Corradino read, while horror con 
vulsed every feature. He gave it to Gherardo. "It is 
indeed from her. She says that the bearer can relate all 
that the world will probably know of her fate. And you 
old man, who weep so bitterly, you to whom my best and 
lovely f ridnd refers me, tell me what you know of her ? " 

Cincolo told his story in broken accents. " May these 
eyes be for ever blinded ! " he cried, when he had con 
cluded, " that knew not Despina in those soft looks and 
heavenly smiles. Dotard that I am ! When my wife 
railed at your family and princely self, and the sainted 
Manfred, why did I not read her secret in her forbear 
ance 1 Would she have forgiven those words in any but 
her who had nursed her infancy, and been a mother to 
her when Madonna Pia died 1 And when she taxed 
Bosticchi with her father s death, I, blind fool, did not 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 1 43 

sec the spirit of the Elisei in her eyes. My Lord, I have 
but one favour to ask you. Let me hear her letter, that 
I may judge from that what hopes remain ; but there 
are none none." 

"Read to him, my dear count," said the prince; "I 
will not fear as he fears. I dare not fear that one so 
lovely and beloved is sacrificed for my worthless cause." 
Gherardo read the letter. 

"Cincolo de Becari, my foster-father, will deliver this 
letter into your hands, my respected and dear Corradino. 
The Countess Elizabeth has urged me to my present 
undertaking ; I hope nothing from it, except to labour 
for your cause, and perhaps, through its event, to quit 
somewhat earlier a life which is but a grievous trial to my 
weak mind. I go to endeavour to arouse the feelings of 
fidelity and generosity in the soul of the traitor Losten- 
dardo ; I go to place myself in his hands, and I do not 
hope to escape from them again. Corradino, my last 
prayer will be for your success. Mourn not for one who 
goes home after a long and weary exile. Burn the 
enclosed packet, without opening it. The Mother of God 
protect thee ! "DESPINA." 

Corradino had wept as this epistle was reading, but 
then, starting up, he said, " To revenge or death ! we may 
yet save her ! " 

A blight had fallen on the house of Swabia, and all 
their enterprises were blasted. Beloved by their subjects, 
noble, and with every advantage of right on their side, 
except those the Church bestowed, they were defeated in 
every attempt to defend themselves against a foreigner 
and a tyrant, who ruled by force of arms, and those in the 
hands of a few only, over an extensive and warlike 
territory. The young and daring Corradino was also fated 
to perish in this contest. Having overcome the troops of 



144 MARY W. SHELLEY. 

his adversary in Tuscany, lie advanced towards his king 
dom with the highest hopes. His arch-enemy, Pope 
Clement IV., had shut himself up in Viterbo, and was 
guarded by a numerous garrison. Corradino passed in 
triumph and hope before the town, and proudly drew out 
his troops before it, to display to the Holy Father his 
forces, and humiliate him by this show of success. The 
cardinals, who beheld the lengthened line and good order 
of the army, hastened to the papal palace. Clement was 
in his oratory praying. The frightened monks, with pale 
looks, related how the excommunicated heretic dared to 
menace the town where the Holy Father himself resided ; 
adding, that if the insult were carried to the pitch of an 
assault, it might prove dangerous warfare. The pope 
smiled contemptuously. " Do not fear," he said ; " the 
projects of these men will dissipate in smoke." He then 
went on the ramparts, and saw Corradino and Frederic 
of Austria, who defiled the line of knights in the plain 
below. He watched them for a time; then turning to 
his cardinals, he said, " They are victims, who permit 
themselves to be led to sacrifice." 

His words were a prophecy. Notwithstanding the 
first successes of Corradino, and the superior numbers of 
his army, he was defeated by the artifice of Charles in a 
pitched battle. He escaped from the field, and, with a few 
friends, arrived at a tower called Asturi, which belonged 
to the family of Frangipani, of Koine. Here he hired a 
vessel, embarked, and put out to sea, directing his course 
for Sicily, which, having rebelled against Charles, would, 
he hoped, receive him with joy. They were already 
under weigh, when one of the family of the Frangipani, 
seeing a vessel filled with Germans making all sail from 
shore, suspected that they were fugitives from the battle 
of Taglicozzo. He followed them in other vessels, and 
took them all prisoners. The person of Corradino was a 
rich prey for him ; he delivered him into the hands of his 



A TALE OF THE PASSIOXS. 145 

rival, and was rewarded by the donation of a fief near 
Benevento. 

The dastardly spirit of Charles instigated him to the 
basest revenge ; and the same tragedy was acted on those 
shores which has been renewed in our days. A daring 
and illustrious prince was sacrificed with the mock forms 
of justice, at the sanguinary altar of tyranny and hypocrisy. 
Corradino was tried. One of his judges alone, a Pro- 
vengal, dared to condemn him, and he paid with his life 
the forfeit of his baseness. For scarcely had he, solitary 
among his fellows, pronounced the sentence of death 
against this prince, than Robert of Flanders, the brother- 
in-law of Charles himself, struck him on the breast with 
a staff, crying, " It behoves not thee, wretch, to condemn 
to death so noble and worthy a knight." The judge fell 
dead in the presence of the king, who dared not avenge 
his creature. 

On the 26th of October Corradino and his friends were 
led out to die in the market-place of Naples, by the sea 
side. Charles was present with all his court, and an 
immense multitude surrounded the triumphant king, and 
his more royal adversary, about to suffer an ignominious 
death. The funereal procession approached its destina 
tion. Corradino, agitated, but controlling his agitation, 
was drawn in an open car. After him came a close litter, 
hung with black, with no sign to tell who was within. 
The Duke of Austria and several other illustrious victims 
followed. The guard that conducted them to the scaffold 
was headed by Lostendardo ; a malicious triumph laughed 
in his eyes, and he rode near the litter, looking from time 
to time first at it and then at Corradino, with the dark 
look of a tormenting fiend. The procession stopped at the 
foot of the scaffold, and Corradino looked at the flashing 
light which every now and then arose from Vesuvius, 
and threw its reflection on the sea. The sun had not yet 
risen, but the halo of its approach illuminated the bay of 



146 MAKY W. SHELLEY. 

Naples, its mountains, and its islands. The summits of 
the distant hills of Baise gleamed with its first beams. 
Corradino thought, "By the time those rays arrive here, 
and shadows are cast from the persons of these men 
princes and peasants around me, my living spirit will be 
shadowless." Then he turned his eyes on the companions 
of his fate, and for the first time he saw the silent and 
dark litter that accompanied them. At first he thought, 
" It is my coffin." But then he recollected the disappear 
ance of Despina, and would have sprang towards it. His 
guards stopped him ; he looked up, and his glance met 
that of Lostendardo, who smiled a smile of dread but 
the feeling of religion which had before calmed him again 
descended on him ; he thought that her sufferings, as well 
as his, would soon be over. 

They were already over ; and the silence of the grave 
is upon those events which had occurred since Cincolo 
beheld her carried out of Florence, until now that she 
was led by her fierce enemy to behold the death of the 
nephew of Manfred. She must have endured much ; for 
when, as Corradino advanced to the front of the scaffold, 
the litter being placed opposite to it, Lostendardo ordered 
the curtains to be withdrawn, the white hand that hung 
inanimate from the side was thin as a winter leaf, and 
her fair face, pillowed by the thick knots of her dark 
hair, was sunken and ashy pale, while you could see the 
deep blue of her eyes struggle through the closed eyelids. 
She was still in the attire in which she had presented 
herself at the house of Cincolo. Perhaps her tormentor 
thought that her appearance as a youth would attract less 
compassion than if a lovely woman were thus dragged to 
so unnatural a scene. 

Corradino was kneeling and praying when her form was 
thus exposed. He saw her, and saw that she was dead ! 
About to die himself ; about, pure and innocent, to die 
ignominiously, while his base conqueror, in pomp and 



A TALE OF THE PASSIONS. 147 

glory, was spectator of his death, he did not pity those 
who were at peace ; his compassion belonged to the living 
alone ; and as he arose from his prayer he exclaimed, 
" My beloved mother, what profound sorrow will the news 
thou art about to hear cause thee ! " He looked upon the 
living multitude around him, and saw that the harcl- 
visaged partisans of the usurper wept ; he heard the sobs 
of his oppressed and conquered subjects; so he drew 
his glove from his hand and threw it among the crowd, in 
token that he still held his cause good, and submitted his 
head to the axe. 

During many years after those events, Lostendardo 
enjoyed wealth, rank, and power. When suddenly, while 
at the summit of glory and prosperity, he withdrew from 
the world, took the vows of a severe order in a convent 
in one of the desolate and unhealthy plains by the sea 
shore in Calabria ; and after having gained the character 
of a saint, through a life of self-inflicted torture, he 
died murmuring the names of Corradino, Manfred, and 
Despina.
