L O D O R E. 



CHAPTER I. 



Excellent creature ! whose perfections make 
Even sorrow lovely ! 

Beaumont and Fletcher. 

Mr. Villiers now became tlie constant visitor of 
Mrs. Elizabeth and her niece ; and all discontent, 
all sadness, all listlessness, vanished in his pre- 
sence. There was in his mind a constant spring of 
vivacity, which did not display itself in mere 
gaiety, but in being perfectly alive at every 
moment, and continually ready to lend himself 
to the comfort and solace of his companions. 

VOL. II. B 



2 LODORE. 

Sitting in their dingy London house, the spirit 
of dulness had drawn a curtain between them 
and the sun ; and neither thought nor event had 
penetrated the fortification of silence and neg- 
lect which environed them. Edward Villiers 
came ; and as mist flies before the wind, so did 
all EthePs depression disappear when his voice 
only met her ear: his step on the stairs an- 
nounced happiness ; and when he was indeed 
before her, light and da}' displaced every rem- 
nant of cheerless obscurity. 

The abstracted, wounded, yet lofty spirit of 
Lodore was totally dissimilar to the airy bright- 
ness of Villiers' disposition. Lodore had out- 
lived a storm, and shown himself majestic in 
ruin. No ill had tarnislied tlie nature of Vil- 
liers: he enjoyed life, he was in good-humour 
with the world, and thought well of mankind. 
Lodore had endangered his peace from the vio- 
lence of passion, and reaped misery from the 
pride of his soul. Villiers was imprudent from 
his belief in the goodness of his fellow- creatures. 



LODORE. 3 

and imparted happiness from the store that his 
warm heart insured to himself. The one had 
never been a boy — the other had not yet learned 
to be a man. 

Ethel's heart had been filled by her father ; 
and all affection, all interest, borrowed their 
force from his memory. She did not think of 
love ; and while Villiers was growing into a 
part of her life, becoming knit to her existence 
by daily habit, and a thousand thoughts ex- 
pended on him, she entertained his idea chiefly 
as havinoj been the friend of Lodore. " He is 
certainly the kindest-hearted creature in the 
world." This was the third time that, when 
la3;ing her gentle head on the pillow, this feeling 
came like a blessing to her closing eyes. She 
heard his voice in the silence of night, even 
more distinctly than when it was addressed to 
her outward sense during the day. For the 
first time after the lapse of months, she found 
one to whom she could spontaneously utter every 
thought, as it rose in her mind. A fond, elder 

B 2 



4 lodorp:. 

brother, if such ever existed, cherishin": the 
confidence and tenderness of a beloved sister, 
might fill the place which her new friend as- 
sumed for Ethel. She thought of him with 
overflowing affection ; and the name of "' ^Ir. 
Villiers " sometimes fell from her lips in soli- 
tude, and hung upon her ear like sweetest music. 
In early life there is a moment — perhaps of all 
the enchantments of love it is the one which is 
never renewed — when passion, unacknowledged 
to ourselves, imparts greater delight than any 
after-stage of that ever-progressive sentiment. 
We neither wish nor expect. A new joy has 
risen, like the sun, upon our lives; and we re- 
joice in the radiance of morning, without ad- 
verting to the noon and twilight that is to follow. 
Ethel stood on the threshold of womanhood : 
the door of life had been closed before her ; — 
again it was thrown open, — and the sudden 
splendour that manifested itself blinded her to 
the forms of the objects of menace or injury, 
wliich a more experienced eye would have dis- 



LODORE. 5 

cerned within the brightness of her new-found 
day. 

Ethel expressed a wish to visit Eton. In 
talking of the past, Lord Lodore had never ad- 
verted to any events except those which had 
occurred during his boyish days. Kis youthful 
pleasures and exploits had often made a part of 
their conversation. He had traced for her a 
plan of Eton college, and the surrounding 
scenery ; spoken of the trembling delight he 
had felt in escaping from bounds ; and told how 
he and Derham had passed happy hours beside 
the clear streams, and beneath the copses, of 
that rural country. There was one fountain 
which he delighted to celebrate; and the ivied 
ruins of an old monastery, now become a part 
of a farm-yard, wliich had been to these friends 
the bodily image of many imaginary scenes. 
Among the sketclies of Whitelock, were several 
taken in the vicinity of W^indsor ; and there 
were, in his portfolio, studies of trees, cottages, 
and also of this same abbey, which Lodore in- 



b LODORE. ^ 

stantly recognized. To many he liad some 
appending anecdote, some school-boy associa- 
tion. He had purchased the whole collection 
from Whitelock. Ethel had copied a few ; and 
these, together with various sketches made in 
the Illinois, formed her dearest treasure, more 
precious in her eyes than diamonds and rubies. 
We are most jealous of what sits nearest to our 
hearts ; and we must love fondly before we can 
let another into the secret of those trivial, but 
cherished emotions, which form the dearest por- 
tion of our solitary meditations. Etiiel had 
several times been on the point of proposing a 
visit to Eton, to her aunt ; but there was an 
awful sacredness in the very name, wliich acted 
like a spell upon her imagination. When first 
it fell from her lips, the word seemed echoed 
by unearthly whisperings, and she fled from the 
idea of going thither, — as it is the feminine dis- 
position often to do, from the full accomplish- 
ment of its wishes, as if disaster must neces- 
sarily be linked to the consummation of their 



LODORE. 7 

desires. But a word was enough for Villiers : 
he eagerly solicited permission to escort them 
thither, as, being an Etonian himself, his guid- 
ance would be of great advantage. Ethel faltered 
her consent ; and the struggle of delight and 
sensibility made that project appear painful, 
which was indeed the darlinoj of her thoughts. 

On a bright day in the first week of May, 
they made this excursion. They repaired to 
one of the inns at Salt Hill, and prolonged their 
walks and drives about the country. In some 
of the former, where old walls were to be 
scrambled up, and rivulets overleaped, Mrs. 
Elizabeth remained at the hotel, and Ethel and 
Villiers pursued their rambles together. EthePs 
whole soul was given up to the deep filial love 
that had induced the journey. Every green 
field was a stage on which her father had played 
a part; each majestic tree, or humble streamlet, 
was hallowed by being associated with his image. 
The pleasant, verdant beauty of the landscape, 
clad in all the brightness of early summer; the 



8 LODORE. 

sunny, balmy day — the clouds which pranked 
the heavens with bright and floating shapes — 
each hedgerow and each cottage, with its trim 
garden — each embowered nook — had a voice 
which was music to her soul. From the col- 
lege of Eton, they sought the dame's house 
where Lodore and Derham had lived ; then 
crossing the bridge, they entered Windsor, and 
prolonged their walk into the forest. Ethel 
knew even the rustic names of the spots she 
most desired to visit, and to these Villiers led 
her in succession. Day declined before they 
got home, and found Mrs. Elizabeth, and their 
repast, waiting them ; and the evening was 
enlivened by many a tale of boyish pranks, 
achieved by Villiers, in these scenes. The fol- 
lowing morning they set forth again ; and three 
days were spent in these delightful wander- 
ings. Ethel would willingly never have quitted 
this spot : it appeared to her as if, seeing all, 
still much remained to be seen — as if she could 
never exhaust tlie variety of sentiments and 



LODOIIE. 9 

deep interest which endeared every foQt of this 
to her so holy ground. Nor were her emotions 
silent, and the softness of her voice, and the 
flowing eloquence with which she expressed 
herself, formed a new charm for her companion. 
Sometimes her heart was too full to admit of 
expression, and grief for her father's loss was 
renewed in all its pristine bitterness. One day, 
on feeling herself thus overcome, she quitted 
her companions, and sought the shady walks of 
the garden of the hotel, to indulge in a gush of 
sorrow which she could not repress. There was 
something in her fi^esture and manner as she left 
them, that reminded Villiers of Lady Lodore. 
It was one of those mysterious family resem- 
blances, which are so striking and powerful, 
and yet which it is impossible to point out to a 
stranger. A hliyh (as this indescribable resem- 
blance is called in some parts of England) of 
her mother struck Villiers forcibly, and he sud- 
denly asked Mrs. Elizabeth, " If Miss Fitz- 

B 5 



10 LODORE. 

henry had never expressed a desire to see Lady 
Lodore." 

" God forbid !" exclaimed the old lady ; " it 
was my brother's dying wish, that she should 
never hear Lady Lodore's name, and I have re- 
ligiously observed it. Ethel only knows that 
she was the cause of her father's misfortunes, 
that she deserted every duty, and is unworthy of 
the name she bears." 

Villiers was astonished at this tirade fall- 
ing from the lips of the unusually placid 
maiden, whose heightened colour bespoke im- 
placable resentment. " Do not mention that 
woman's name, Mr. Villiers,'' she continued, 
" I am convinced that I should die on the spot 
if I saw her ; she is as much a murderess, as if 
she had stabbed her husband to the heart with 
a dagger. Her letter to me that I sent to my 
poor brother in America, was more the cause 
of his death, I am sure, than all the duels in 
the world. Lady Lodore ! I often wonder a 



LODORE. 11 

thunderbolt from heaven does not fall on and 
kill her!" 

Mrs. Elizabeth's violence was checked by 
seeing Ethel cross the road to return. " Pro- 
mise not to mention her name to my niece," she 
cried. 

" For the'present be assured that I will not," 
Villiers answered. He had been struck most 
painfully by some of Mrs. Elizabeth's expres- 
sions, they implied so much more of misconduct 
on Lady Lodore's part, than he had ever sus- 
pected — but she must know best ; and it seemed 
to him, indeed, the probable interpretation of 
the mystery that enveloped her separation from 
her husband. The account spread by Lady San- 
terre, and current in the world, appeared inade- 
quate and improbable; Lodore would not have 
dared to take her child from her, but on heavier 
grounds ; it was then true, that a dark and dis- 
graceful secret was hidden in her heart, and 
that her propriety, her good reputation, her 
seeming pride of innocence, were but the mask 



12 LODORE. 

to cover the reality that divided her from her 
daughter for ever. 

Villiers was well acquainted with Lady Lo- 
dore; circumstances had caused him to take a 
deep interest in her — these were now at an 
end : but the singular coincidences that had 
brought him in contact with her daughter, re- 
newed many forgotten images, and caused him 
to dwell on the past with mixed curiosity and 
uneasiness. Mrs. Elizabeth's expressions added 
to the perplexity of his ideas ; their chief effect 
was to tarnish to his mind the name of Lady 
Lodore, and to make him rejoice at the termi- 
nation that had been put to their more intimate 
connexion. 



T-ODORE. 13 



CHAPTER II. 

One^ within whose subtle being. 

As light and wind within some delicate cloud, 

That fades amid the blue noon's burning sky. 

Genius and youth contended. 

Shelley. 

The party returned to town, and on the fol- 
lowing evening they went to the Italian Opera. 
For the first time since her father's death, 
Ethel threw aside her mourning attire : for the 
first time also, she made one of the audience at 
the King's Theatre. She went to hear tht^ 
music, and to spend the evening with the only 
person in the world who was drawn towards her 
by feelings of kindness and sympathy— the 



14 LODORE. 

only person — but that sufficed. His being near 
her, was the occasion of more delight than it' 
she had been made the associate of regal 
splendour. Yet it was no defined or disturbing 
sentiment, that sat so lightly on her bosom and 
slione in her eyes. Her's was the first gentle 
opening of a girPs heart, who does not busy 
herself with the future, and reposes on the 
serene present with unquestioning confidence. 
She looked round on the gay world assembled, 
and thought, "All are as happy as I am." She 
listened to the music with a subdued but 
charmed spirit, and turned now and then to her 
companions with a glad smile, expressive of her 
delight. Fewer words were spoken in their 
little box, probably than in any in tlie house ; 
but in none were congregated three hearts 
so guileless, and so perfectly satisfied with the 
portion allotted to them. 

At length both opera and ballet were over, 
and, leaning on the arm of Villiers, the ladies 
entered the round-room. The house had been 



LODORE. 15 

very full and the crowd was §reat. A seat was 
obtained for Aunt Bessy on one of the sofas 
near the door, which opened on the principal 
staircase. Villiers and Ethel stood near her. 
When the crowd had thinned a little, Villiers 
went to look for the servant, and Ethel remain- 
ed surveying the moving numbers with curio- 
sity, wondering at her own fate, that while 
every one seemed familiar one to the other, she 
knew, and was known by, none. She did not 
repine at this ; Villiers had dissipated the sense 
of desertion which before haunted her, and she 
was much entertained, as she heard the remarks 
and interchange of compliments going on about 
her. Her attention was particularly attracted 
by a very beautiful woman, or rather girl slie 
seemed, standing on the other side of the room, 
conversing with a very tall personage, to whom 
she, being not above the middle size, looked up 
as she talked ; which action, perhaps, added to 
her youthful appearance. There was an ease 
in her manners that bespoke a matron as to 



16 LODOllE. 

station. She was dressed very simply in white, 
without any ornament; her cloak hung care- 
lessly from her shoulders, and gave to view her 
round symmetrical figure; her silky, chesnut- 
coloured hair, fell in tliick ringlets round her 
face, and was gathered with inimitable elegance 
in large knots on the top of her head. There 
was something bewitching in her animated 
smile, and sensibility beamed from her long and 
dark grey eyes ; her simple gesture as she 
placed her little hand on her cloak, her attitude 
as she stood, were wholly unpretending, but 
graceful beyond measure. Ethel watched lier 
unobserved, with admiration and interest, so 
that she almost forgot where she was, until the 
voice of Villiers recalled her. " Your carriage 
is up — will you come i^"" The lady turned as 
he spoke, and recognized him with a cordial 
and most sweet smile. Thev moved on, while 
Ethel turned back to look again, as her car- 
riage was loudly called, and Mrs. Elizabeth 
seizing her arm, w]ii>[)Livd out of breath, '' () 



LODORE, IT 

my dear, do make haste!" She hurried on, 
therefore, and her glance was momentary ; but 
she saw with wonder, that the lady was looking 
with eagerness at the party ; she caught EtheFs 
eye, blushed and turned away, while the fold- 
ing doors closed, and with a kind of nervous 
trepidation her companions descended the stairs. 
In a moment the ladies were in their carriage, 
which drove off, while Mrs. Elizabeth exclaimed 
in the tone of one aghast, " Thank God, we got 
away ! O, Ethel, that was Lady Lodore !" 

" My mother ! — impossible !'' 

" O, that we had never come to town," con- 
tinued her aunt. " Long have I prayed that 
I might never see her again ; — and she looking 
as if nothing had happened, and that Lodore 
had not died through' her means ! Wicked, 
wicked woman ! I will not stay in London a day 
longer !" 

Ethel did not interrupt her ravings : she re- 
membered Captain Markham, and could not 
believe but that her aunt laboured under some 



18 LODORE. 

similar mistake ; it was ridiculous to imagine, 
that this girlish-looking, lovely being, had been 
the wife of her father, whom she remembered 
with his high forehead rather bare of hair, his 
deep marked countenance, his look that be- 
spoke more than mature age. Her aunt was 
mistaken, she felt sure ; and yet when she closed 
her eyes, the beautiful figure she had seen 
stole, according to the Arabian image, beneath 
her lids, and smiled sweetly, and again started 
forward to look after her. This little act 
seemed to confirm what Mrs. Elizabeth said ; 
and yet, again, it was impossible ! " Had she 
been named my sister, there were something in 
it — but my mother,— impossible !" 

Yet strange as it seemed, it was so ; in this 
instance, Mrs. Elizabetlt had not deceived her- 
self; and thus it was that two so near of kin as 
mother and daughter, met, it might be said, for 
the first time. Villiers was inexpressibly shock- 
ed ; and believing that Lady Lodore must suffer 
keenly from so strange and unnatural an inci- 



LODORE. 19 

dent, his first kindly impulse was to seek to 
see her on the following morning. During her 
absence, the violent attack of her sister-in-law 
had weighed with him, but her look at once 
dissipated his uneasy doubts. There was that 
in this lady, which no man could resist ; she had 
joined to her beauty, the charm of engaging man- 
ners, made up of natural grace, vivacity, intuitive 
tact, and soft sensibility, which infused a kind of 
idolatry into the admiration with which she was 
universally regarded. But it was not the 
beauty and fashion of Lady Lodore which 
caused Villiers to take a deep interest in her. 
His intercourse with her had been of long stand- 
ing, and the object of his very voyage to Ame- 
rica was intimately connected with her. 

Edward Villiers was the son of a man of 
fortune. His father had been left a widower 
young in life, with this only child, who, thus 
single and solitary in his paternal home, became 
almost adopted into the family of his mother's 
brother. Viscount Maristow. This nobleman be- 



20 LODORE. 

ing rich, inarricd, and blessed with a numerous 
progeny, the y)resence of little Edward was not 
felt as a burthen, and he was brought up with 
his cousins like one of them. Among these it 
would have been hard if Villiers could not have 
found an especial friend : this was not the 
elder son, who, much his senior, looked down 
upon him with friendly regard ; it was the 
second, who was likewise several years older. 
Horatio Saville was a being fashioned for every 
virtue and distinguished by every excellence ; 
to know that a thing was right to be done, was 
enough to impel Horatio to go through fire and 
water to do it ; he was one of those who seem 
not to belong to this world, yet who adorn it 
most ; conscientious, upright, and often cold 
in seeming, because he could always master his 
passions ; good over-much, he might be called, 
but that there was no pedantry nor harshness 
in his nature. Resolute, aspiring, and true, his 
noble purposes and studious soul, demanded a 
frame of iron, and he had one of the frailest 



LODORE. 21 

mechanism. It was not that he was not tall, 
well-shaped, with earnest eyes, a brow built up 
high to receive and entertain a capacious 
mind ; but he was thin and shadowy, a hectic 
flushed his cheek, and his voice was broken and 
mournful. At school he held the topmost 
place, at college he was distinguished by the 
energy with which he pursued his studies ; 
and these, so opposite from what might have 
been expected to be the pursuits of his 
ardent mind, were abstruse metaphysics — 
the highest and most theoretical mathematics, 
and cross-grained argument, based upon hair-fine 
logic ; to these he addicted himself. His desire 
was knowledge ; his passion truth ; his eager 
and never-sleeping endeavour was to inform 
and to satisfy his understanding. Villiers waited 
on him, as an inferior spirit may attend on an 
archangel, and gathered from him the crumbs 
of his knowledge, with gladness and content. 
He could not force his boyish mind to similar 
exertions, nor feel that keen thirst for know- 



22 LODORE. 

ledge that kept alive his cousin's application, 
though he could admire and love these with 
fervour, when exhibited in another. It was in- 
deed a singular factj that this constant contem- 
plation of so superior a being, added to his 
careless turn of mind. Not to be like Horatio was 
to be nothing — to be like him was impossible. 
So he was content to remain one of the half- 
ignorant, uninformed creatures most men are, 
and to found his pride upon his affection for his 
cousin, who, being several years older, might 
well be advanced even beyond his emulation. 
Horatio himself did not desire to be imitated by 
the light-hearted Edward ; he was too familiar 
with the exhaustion, the sadness, the disappoint- 
ment of his pursuits; he could not be otherwise 
himself, but he thought all that he aspired 
after, was well exchanged for the sparkling 
eyes, exhaustless spirits, and buoyant step of 
Villiers. We none of us wish to exchange our 
identity for that of another; yet we are never 
satisfied with ourselves. The unknown has al- 



LODORE. 23 

ways a charm, and unless blinded by miserable 
vanity, we know ourselves too well to appre- 
ciate our especial characteristics at a very high 
rate. When Horace, after deep midnight study, 
felt his brain still working like a thousand mill- 
wheels, that cannot be stopped ; when sleep 
fled from him, and yet his exhausted mind 
could no longer continue its labours — he envied 
the light slumbers of his cousin, which followed 
exercise and amusement. Villiers loved and 
revered him ; and he felt drawn closer to him 
than towards any of his brothers, and strove to 
refine his taste and regulate his conduct through 
his admonitions and example, while he abstained 
from following him in the steep and thorny 
path he had selected. 

Horatio quitted college ; he was no longer a 
youth, and his manhood became as studious as 
his younger days. He had no desire but for 
knowledge, no thought but for tlie nobler crea- 
tions of the soul, and the discernment of the 
sublime laws of God and nature. He nourish- 



24 LODORE. 

ed the ambition of showing to these latter davs 
what scholars of old had been, though this 
feeling was subservient to his instinctive love of 
learning, and his wish to adorn his mind with 
the indefeasible attributes of truth. He was 
universally respected and loved, though little 
understood. His young cousin Edward only 
was aware of the earnestness of his affections, 
and the sensibility that nestled itself in his 
warm heart. He was outwardly mild, placid, 
and forbearing, and thus obtained the reputa- 
tion of being cold — though those who study 
human nature ought to make it their first 
maxim, that those who are tolerant of the follies 
of their fellows — who sympathize with, and as- 
sist their wishes, and who apparently forget 
tlieir own desires, as" they devote themselves to 
the accomplishment of those of their friends, 
must have the quickest feelings to make them 
enter into and understand those of others, and 
tlie warmest affections to be able to conquer 
their wayward humours, so that they can divest 



LODORE. 25 

themselves of selfishness, and incorporate in 
their own being the pleasures and pains of 
those around them. 

The sparkling eye, the languid step, and 
flushed cheek of Horatio Saville, were all tokens 
that there burnt within him a spirit too strong 
for his frame ; but he never complained ; or 
if he ever poured out his pent-up emotions, it 
was in the ear of Edward only; who but partly 
understood him, but who loved him entirely. 
What that thirst for knowledge was that preyed 
on him, and for ever urged him to drink of the 
purest streams of wisdom, and yet which ever 
left him unsatisfied, fevered, and mournful, 
the gay spirit of Edward Villiers could not 
guess : often he besought his cousin to close his 
musty books, to mount a rapid horse, to give 
his studies to the winds, and deliver his soul 
to nature. But Horace pointed to some unex- 
plained passage in Plato the divine, or some 
undiscovered problem in the higher sciences, 
and turned his eyes from the sun ; or if indeed 

VOL. II. c 



26 LODORE. 

he yielded, and accompanied his youthfid 
friend, some appearance of earth or air would 
awaken his curiosity, rouze his slumbering mind 
again to inquire, and making his study of the 
wide cope of heaven, he gave himself up to ab- 
struse meditation, while nominally seeking for 
relaxation from his heavier toils. 

Horatio Saville was nine-and-twenty when 
he first met Lady Lodore, who was nearly the 
same age. He had begun to feel that his health 
was shaken, and he tried to forget for a time 
his devouring avocations. He changed the 
scene, and went on a visit to a friend, who had 
a country house not far from Hastings. Lady 
Lodore was expected as a guest, together with 
her mother. She was much talked of, having 
become an object of interest or curiosity to the 
many. A mystery hung over her fate; but her 
reputation was cloudless, and she was warmly 
supported by the leaders of fashion. Saville 
heard of her beauty and her sufferings ; the in- 
iusticc with which she had been treated — of her 



LODORE. 27 

magnanimity and desolate condition ; he heard 
of her talents, her powers of conversation, her 
fashion. He figured to himself (as we are apt 
to incarnate to our imagination the various 
qualities of a human being, of whom we hear 
much) a woman, brilliant, but rather mascu- 
line, majestic in figure, with wild dark eyes, 
and a very determined manner. Lady Lodorc 
came : she entered the room where he was sit- 
ting, and the fabric of his fancy was at once 
destroyed. He saw a sweet-looking woman ; 
serene, fair, and with a countenance expressive 
of contented happiness. He found that her 
manners were winning, from their softness ; her 
conversation was delightful, from its total want 
of pretension or impertinence. 

What the power was that from the first mo- 
ment they met, drew Horatio Saville and Lady 
Lodore together is one of those natural secrets 
which it is impossible to explain. Though a 
student, Saville Avas a gentleman, with the man- 
ners and appearance of the better specimens of 

c2 



28 LODORE. 

our aristocracy. There might be something in 
his look of ill health, which demanded sym- 
pathy ; something in his superiority to the rest 
of the persons about her, in the genius that sat 
on his brow, and the eloquence that flowed from 
bis lips ; something in the contrast he presented | 
to every one else she had ever seen — neither 
entering into their gossiping slanders, nor un- 
derstanding their empty self-sufficiency, that 
possessed a charm for one satiated with the 
world's common scene. It was less of wonder 
that Cornelia pleased the student. There were 
no rough corners, no harshness about lier ; she 
won her way into any heart by her cheerful 
smiles and kind tones ; and she listened to Sa- 
ville when he talked of what other women! 
would have lent a languid ear to, with such an] 
air of interest, tliat he found no pleasure so 
great as that of talking on. 

Saville was accustomed to find the men of 
his acquaintance ignorant. All the knowledge 
of worldlings was as a point in comparison with 



LODOKE. 29 

his vast acquirements. He did not seek Lady 
Lodore's society either to learn or to teach, but 
to forget thought, and to feel himself occupied 
and diverted from the sense of listlessness that 
haunted him in society, without having recourse 
to the, to him dangerous, attraction of his 
books. 

Lady Lodore had, in the very brightness of 
her earliest youth, selected a proud and inde- 
pendent position. She had refused to bend to 
her husband's will, or to submit to the tyranny, 
as she named it, which he had attempted to 
exercise. Youth is bold and fearless. The 
forked tongue of scandal, the thousand ills with 
which woman is threatened in society, without 
a guide or a protector — all the worldly consi- 
derations which might lead her to unite herself 
again to her husband, she had rejected with 
unbounded disdain. Her mother was there to 
stand between her and the shafts of envy and 
calumny, and she conceived no mistrust of her- 
self; she believed that she could hold her 



30 LODORE. 

course with taintless feelings and security cf 
soul, through a thousand dangers. At first she 
had been somewhat annoyed by ill-natured ob- 
servations, but Lady Santerre poured the balm 
of flattery on her wounds, and a few tears shed 
in her presence dissipated the gathering cloud. 

Cornelia had every motive a woman could have 
for guarding her conduct from reproach. She 
lived in the midst of polished society, and was 
thoroughly imbued with its maxims and laws. 
She witnessed the downfall of several, as young 
and lovely as herself, and heard the sarcasms 
and beheld the sneers wliich were heaped as a 
tomb above their buried fame. She had vowed 
to herself never to become one of these. She 
was applauded for her pride, and held up as a 
pattern. No one feared her. She was no co- 
quette, though she strove universally to please. 
She formed no intimate friendships, though 
every man felt honoured by her notice. She 
had no prudery on her lips, but her conduct 
was as open and as fiiir as day. Here lay her 



LODORE. 31 

defence against her husband ; and she preserved 
even the outposts of such bulwarks with scru- 
pulous yet unobtrusive exactitude. 

Her spirits, as well as her spirit, held her up 
through many a year. More than ten years 
had passed since her separation from Lo- 
dore— a long time to tell of; but it had glided 
away, she scarcely knew how — taking little 
from her loveliness, adding to the elegance of 
her appearance, and the grace of her manners. 
Season after season came, and went, and she had 
no motive for counting them anxiously. She 
was sought after and admired ; it was a holiday 
life for her, and she wondered what people 
meant when they spoke of the delusions of this 
world, and the dangers of our own hearts. She 
saw a gay reality about her, and felt the exist- 
ence of no internal enemy. Nothing ever moved 
her to sorrow, except the reflection that now 
and then came across, that she had a child — di- 
vorced for ever from her maternal bosom. The 
sight of a baby cradled in its mother's arms, or 



32 LODOIIE. 

Stretching out its little hands to her, had not 
unoften caused her to turn abruptly away, to 
hide her tears ; and once or twice she had been 
obliged to quit a theatre to conceal her emotion, 
when such sentiments were brought too vividly 
before her. But when her eyes were drowned 
in tears, and her bosom heaved with sad emo- 
tion, pride came to check the torrent, and 
hatred of her oppressor gave a new impulse to 
her swelling heart. 

She had rather avoided female friendships, and 
had been warned from them by the treachery of 
one, and the misconduct of another, of her 
more intimate acquaintances. Lady Lodore re- 
nounced friendship, but the world began to 
grow a little dull. The frivolity of one, the 
hard-heartedness of another, disgusted. She 
saw each occupied by themselves and their fami- 
lies, and she was alone. Balls and assemblies 
palled upon her — country pleasures were stupid 
— she had began to think all things " stale and 
unprofitable," when she became acquainted with 



LODORE. 33 

Horatio Saville. She was glad again to feel 
animated with a sense of living enjoyment; she 
congratulated herself on the idea that she could 
take interest in some one thing or person among 
the empty shapes that surrounded her; and 
without a thought beyond the amusement of the 
present moment, most of her hours were spent 
in his company. 



31* LODORE. 



CHAPTER III. 

Ah now, ye gentle pair, — now think awhile. 
Now, while ye still can think and still can smile. 
* « ♦ 

So did they think 

Only v.ith graver thoughts, and smiles reduced. 

Leigh Hunt. 

A MONTH stole away as if it had been a day, and 
Lady Lodore was engaged to pass some weeks 
with another friend in a distant county. It was 
easily contrived, without contrivance, by Sa- 
ville, that he should visit a relation who lived 
within a morning's ride of her new abode. The 
restriction placed upon their intercourse while 
residing under different roofs contrasted pain- 



LODORE. 35 

fully with the perfect freedom they had enjoyed 
while inhabiting the same. Their attachment 
was too young and too unacknowledged to need 
the zest of difficulty. It required indeed the 
facility of an unobstructed path for it to pro- 
ceed to the accustomed bourne; and a straw 
thrown across was sufficient to check its course 
for ever. 

The impatience and restlessness which Cor- 
nelia experienced during her journey ; the rush 
of transport that thrilled through her when she 
heard of Saville's arrival at a neighbouring 
mansion, awoke her in an instant to a know- 
ledge of the true state of her heart. Her pride 
was, happily for herself, united to presence of 
mind and fortitude. She felt the invasion of 
the enemy, and she lost not a moment in repel- 
ling the dangers that menaced her. She re- 
solved to be true to the line of conduct she had 
marked out for herself — she determined not to 
love. She did not alter her manner nor her 
actions. She met Horatio with the same sweet 



38 LODORE. 

smile — slie conversed with the same kind in- 
terest ; but she did not indulge in one dream, 
one thought — one reverie (sweet food of love) 
during his absence, and guarded over herself 
that no indication of any sentiment less general 
than the friendship of society might appear. 
Though she was invariably kind, yet his feel- 
ings told him that she was changed, without his 
being able to discover where the alteration lay ; 
the line of demarcation, which she took care 
never to pass, was too finely traced, for any but 
feminine tact to discern, though it obstructed 
him as if it had been as high and massive as a 
city wall. Now and then his speaking eye 
rested on her with a pleading glance, while slie 
answered his look with a frank smile, that spoke 
a heart at ease, and perfect self-possession. In- 
deed, while they remained near each other, in 
despite of all her self-denying resolves, Cornelia 
was happy. She felt that there was one being 
in the world who took a deep and present in- 
terest in her, whose thoughts hovered round her 



LODORE. 37 

and whose mind she could influence to the con- 
ception of any act or feeling she might desire. 
That tranquillity yet animation of spirit — that 
gratitude on closing her eyes at night — that 
glad anticipation of the morrow's sun — that ab- 
sence of every harsh and jarring emotion, which 
is the disposition of the human soul the nearest 
that we can conceive to perfect happiness, and 
which now and then visits sad humanity, to 
teach us of what unmeasured and pure joy our 
fragile nature is capable, attended her existence, 
and made each hour of the day a new-born 
blessing. 

This state of things could not last. An ac- 
cident revealed to Saville the true state of his 
heart ; he became aware that he loved Cornelia, 
deeply and fervently, and from that moment he 
resolved to exile himself for ever from her dear 
presence. Misery is the child of love when liap- 
piness is not ; this Horatio feit, but he did not 
shrink from the endurance. All abstracted and 
lofty as his speculations were, still his place had 



38 LODORE. 

been in the hot-bed of patrician society, and he 
was familiar with the repetition of domestic re- 
volutions, too frequent there. For worlds he 
would not have Cornelia's name become a bye- 
word and mark for scandal— that name which she 
had so long kept bright and unreachable. His 
natural modesty prevented him from entertaining 
the idea that he could indeed destroy her peace ; 
but he knew how many and easy are the paths 
which lead to the loss of honour in the world's 
eyes. That it could be observed and surmised 
that one man had approached Lady Lodore 
with any but sentiments of reverence, was an 
evil to be avoided at any cost. Saville was 
firm as rock in his resolves — he neither doubted 
nor procrastinated. He left the neighbourhood 
where she resided, and, returning to his father's 
house, tried to acquire strengtii to bear the 
severe pain which he could not master. 

His gentle and generous nature, ever thought- 
ful for others, and ])rodigal of self, was not 
however satisfied with this mere negative act 



LODORE. 3d 

of justice towards one who honoured him, 
he felt conscious, with her friendship and 
kindest thoughts. He was miserable in the idea 
that he could not further serve her. He re- 
volved a thousand plans in his mind, tending 
to her advantage. In fancy he entered the soli- 
tude of her meditations, and tried to divine 
what her sorrows or desires were, that he might 
minister to their solace or accomplishment. 
Their previous intercourse had been very un- 
reserved, and though Cornelia spoke but dis- 
tantly and coldly of Lodore, she frequently 
mentioned her child, and lamented, with much 
emotion, the deprivation of all those joys which 
maternal love bestows. Often had Saville said, 
" Why not appeal more strongly to Lord Lo- 
dore ? or, if he be inflexible, why calmly endure 
an outrage shocking to humanity ? The laws of 
your country may assist you." 

" They would not," said Cornelia, "for 
his reply would be so fraught with seeming jus- 
tice, that the blame would fall back on me. 



40 LODORE. 

He asks but the trivial sacrifice of iny duty to 
my mother — my poor mother ! who, since I was 
born, has lived with me and for me, and who 
has no existence except through me. I am to 
tear away, and to trample upon the first of 
human ties, to render myself worthy of the 
guardianship of my child ! I cannot do it — I 
should hold myself a parricide. Do not let us 
talk more of these things ; endurance is the fate 
of woman, and if I have more than my share, let 
us hope that some other poor creature, less able 
to bear, has her portion lightened in conse- 
quence. I should be glad if once indeed I 
were permitted to see my cherub girl, though 
it were only while she slept ; but an ocean rolls 
between us, and patience must be my com- 
forter.'' 

The soft sweetness of her look and voice, the 
angelic grace that animated every tone and 
glance, rendered these maternal complaints 
mournful, vet enchanting music to the ear of 
Saville. He could have listened for ever. But 



LODORE. 41 

when exiled from her, they assumed another 
form. He began to think whether it were not 
possible to convince Lord Lodore of the in- 
excusable cruelty of his conduct ; and again and 
again, he imaged the exultation of heart he 
should feel, if he could succeed in placing her 
lost babe in the mother's arms. 

Saville was the frankest of human beings. 
Finding his cousin Edward on a visit at Mari- 
stow castle, he imparted his project to him, of 
making a voyage to America, seeking out Lord 
Lodore, and using every argument and persua- 
sion to induce him to restore her daughter to his 
wife. Villiers was startled at the mention of 
this chivalrous intent. What could have rouzed 
the studious Horace to such sudden energy ? 
By one of those strange caprices of the human 
mind, which bring forth discord instead of har- 
mony, Edward had never liked Lady Lodore — 
he held her to be false and dangerous. Circum- 
stances had brought him more in contact witli 
her mother than herself, and the two were asso- 



42 LODORE. 

ciated and confounded in his mind, till he heard 
Lady Santerre"'s falsetto voice in the sweet one 
of Cornelia, and saw her deceitful vulgar de- 
vices in the engaging manners of her daughter. 
He was struck with horror when he discovered 
that Saville loved, nay, idolized this beauteous 
piece of mischief, as he would have named her. 
He saw madness and folly in his Quixotic expe- 
dition, and argued against it with all his might. 
It would not do ; Horatio was resolved to dedi- 
cate himself to the happiness of her he loved ; 
and since this must be done in absence and 
distance, what better plan than to restore to her 
the precious treasure of which she had been 
robbed ? 

Saville resolved to cross the Atlantic, and, 
though opposed to his scheme, Villiers offered 
to accompany him. A voyage to America was 
but a trip to an active and unoccupied young 
man ; the society of his cousin would render 
the journey delightful ; he preferred it at all 
times to the commoner pleasures of life, and 



LODORE. 43 

besides, on this occasion, he was animated with 
the hope of being useful to him. There was 
nothing effeminate in Saville. His energy of 
purpose and depth of thought forbade the idea. 
Still there was something that appeared to re- 
quire kindness and support. His delicate 
health, of which he took no care, demanded femi- 
nine attentions ; his careless reliance upon the 
uprightness of others, and total self-oblivion, 
often hurried him to the brink of dangers •, and 
though fearlessness and integrity were at hand 
to extricate him, Edward, who knew his keen 
sensibility and repressed quickness of temper, 
was not without fear, that on so delicate a mis- 
sion his ardent feelings might carry him beyond 
the mark, and that, in endeavouring to serve a 
woman whom he loved with enthusiastic adora- 
tion, he might rouze the angry passions of her 
husband. 

With such feelings the cousins crossed the 
Atlantic and arrived at New York. Thence 
they proceeded to the west of America, and 



44 LODORE. 

passing Lodore and his daughter on the road 
without knowing it, arrived at the Illinois after 
their departure. They were astonished to find 
that Mr. Fitzhenry, as he was named to them, 
had broken up his establishment, sold his farm, 
and departed with the intention of returning to 
Europe. What this change might portend they 
could not guess. Whether it were the result of 
any communication with Lady Lodore— whether 
a reconciliation was under discussion, or whether 
it were occasioned by caprice merely they could 
not tell ; at any rate, it seemed to put an end 
to Saville's mediation. If Lodore returned to 
England, it was probable that Cornelia would 
herself make an exertion to have her child re- 
stored to her. Whether he could be of any use 
was problematical, but untimely interference 
was to be deprecated ; events must be left to 
take their own course : Saville was scarcely 
himself aware how glad he was to escape any 
kind of intercourse with the husband of Cornelia. 
This feeling, however unacknowledged, be- 



LODORE. 45 

came paramount with him. Now that Lodore 
was about to leave America, he wished to linger 
in it ; he planned a long tour through the vari- 
ous states, he studied their laws and customs, 
he endeavoured to form a just estimate of the 
institutions of the New World, and their influ- 
ence on those governed by them. 

Edward had little sympathy in these pur- 
suits ; he was eager to return to London, and 
felt more inclined to take his gun and shoot in 
the forests, than to mingle in the society of the 
various towns. This difference of taste caused 
the cousins at various times to separate. Saville 
was at Washington when Villiers made a journey 
to the borders of Canada, to the falls of the 
Niagara, and returned by New York ; a por- 
tion of the United States which his cousin 
avoided visiting, until Lodore should have 
quitted it. 

Thus it was that a strange combination of 
circumstances brought Villiers into contact with 
this unfortunate nobleman, and made him a 



46 LODORE. 

witness of and a participator in the closing 
scene of his disastrous and wasted life. Villiers 
did not sympathize in his cousin's admiration of 
Cornelia, and was easily won to take a deep in- 
terest in the fortunes of her husband. The 
very aspect of Lodore commanded attention ; 
his voice entered tlie soul : ill-starred, and 
struck by calamity, he rose majestically from 
the ruin around him, and seemed to defy fate. 
The first thought that struck Villiers was, how 
could Lady I.odore desert such a man ; how- 
pi tifully degraded must she be, who preferred 
the throng of fools to the society of so matchless 
a being ! The gallantry with w hich he rushed to 
his fate, his exultation in the prospect of re- 
deeming his honour, his melting tenderness to- 
wards his daughter, filled Villiers with respect 
and compassion. It was all over now. Lodore 
was dead : his passions, his wrongs, his errors 
slept with him in the grave. He had departed 
from the busy stage, never to be forgotten — yet 
to be seen no more. 



LODORE. 47 

Lodare was dead, and Cornelia was free. 
Her husband had alluded to the gladness with 
which she would welcome liberty ; and Villiers 
knew that there was another, also, whose heart 
would rejoice, and open itself at once to. the 
charming visitation of permitted love. Villiers 
sighed to think that Saville would marry the 
beautiful widow ; but he did not doubt that this 
event would take place. 

Having seen that Ethel was in kind hands, 
and learnt the satisfactory arrangements made 
for her return to England, he hastened to join 
his cousin, and to convey the astounding intel- 
ligence. Saville's generous disposition prevented 
exultation, and subdued joy. Still the prospect 
of future happiness became familiar to him, 
shadowed only by the fear of not obtaining the 
affections of her he so fervently loved. For, 
strange to say, Saville was diffident to a fault : 
he could not imagine any qualities in himself to 
attract a beautiful and fashionable woman. His 
hopes were slight; liis thoughts timid : the ])ain 



48 LODORE. 

of eternal division was replaced by the gentler 
anxieties of love ; and he returned to England, 
scarcely daring to expect that crown to his de- 
sires, which seemed too high an honour, too 
dear a blessing, for earthly love to merit. 



LODORE. 49 



CHAPTER IV. 

Ma la fede degli Amanti 
£ come I'Araba fenice ; 
Che vi sia, ciaschim' lo dice^ 
Ma dove sia, nessun lo sa. 

Metastasio. 

Meanwhile Lady Lodore had been enduring 
the worst miseries of ill-fated love. The illness 
of Lady Santerre, preceding her death, had 
demanded all her time ; and she nursed her 
with exemplary patience and kindness. During 
her midnight watchings and solitary days, she 
had full time to feel how deep a wound her 
heart had received. The figure and countenance 
of her absent friend haunted her in spite of 
every effort ; and when death hovered over the 

K VOL. II. D 



50 LODORE. 

pillow of her mother, she clung, with mad des- 
peration, to the thought, that there was still 
one, when this parent should be gone, to love 
her, even though she never saw him more. 

Lady Santerre died. After the first burst of 
natural grief, Cornelia began to reflect that 
Lord Lodore might now imagine that every 
obstacle to their reconciliation was removed. 
She had looked upon her husband as her enemy 
and injurer; she had regarded him with indig- 
nation and fear ; — but now she hated him. 
Strong aversion had sprung up, during the 
struggles of passion, in her bosom. She hated 
him as the eternal barrier between her and one 
who loved her with rare disinterestedness. The 
human heart must desire happiness ; — in spite of 
every effort at resignation, it must aspire to the 
fulfilment of its wish. Lord Lodore was the 
cause why she was cut off from it for ever. He 
had foreseen that this feeling, this combat, this 
misery, would be her doom, in the deserted situ- 
ation she chose for Iierself: she had laughed 



LODORE. 51 

his fears to scorn. Now she abhorred him the 
more for having divined her destiny. While 
she banished the pleasant thoughts of love, she 
indulged in the poisoned ones of hate ; and 
while she resisted each softer emotion as a 
crime, she opened her heart to the bitterest 
resentment, as a permitted solace ; nor was she 
aware that thus she redoubled all her woes. It 
was under the influence of these feelings, that 
she had written to Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry 
that harsh, decided letter, which Lodore re- 
ceived at New York. The intelligence of his 
violent death came as an answer to her expres- 
sions of implacable resentment. A pang of re- 
morse stung her, when she thought how she had 
emptied the vials of her wrath on a head which 
had so soon after been laid low for ever. 

The double loss of husband and mother 
caused Lady Lodore to seclude herself, not in 
absolute solitude, but in the agreeable retreat 
of friendly society. She was residing near 
Brighton, when Saville returned from America, 

d2 

UNIVERSITY OF 
IIUNOIS LIBHAKY 



52 LODORE. 

and, with a heart beating high with its own de- 
sires, again beheld the mistress of his affections. 
His delicate nature caused him to respect the 
weeds she wore, even though they might be 
termed a mockery : they were the type of her 
freedom and his hopes ; yet, as the tokens of 
death, they were to be respected. He saw her 
more beautiful than ever, more courted, more 
waited on ; and he half despaired. How could 
he, the abstracted student, the man of dreams, 
the sensitive and timid invalid, ensnare the fancy 
of one formed to adorn the circles of wealth and 
fashion ? 

Thus it was that Saville and Cornelia were 
further off than ever, when they imagined them- 
selves most near. Neither of them could after- 
wards comprehend what divided them ; or why 
when each would have died for the other's sake 
cobweb barriers should have proved inextri- 
cable ; and wherefore, after weathering every 
more stormy peril, they should perish beneath 
the influence of a summer breeze. 



LODORE. 53 

The pride of Cornelia's heart, hid by the 
artificial courtesies of society, was a sentiment 
resolved, confirmed, active, and far beyond her 
own controul. The smallest opposition appeared 
rebellion to her majesty of will ; while her 
own caprices, her own desires, were sacred 
decrees. She was too haughty to admit of dis- 
cussion — too firmly intrenched in a sense of 
what was 'due to her, not to start indignantly 
from remonstrance. It is true, all this was but 
a painted veil. She was tremblingly alive to 
censure, and wholly devoted to the object of 
her attachment ; but Saville was unable to un- 
derstand these contradictions. His modesty led 
him to believe, that he, of all men, was least 
calculated to excite love in a woman's bosom. 
He saw in Cornelia a beautiful creation, to 
admire and adore ; but he was slow to perceive 
the tenderness of soul, which her disposition 
made her anxious to conceal, and he was con- 
scious of no qualities in himself that could en- 
title him to a place in her affections. Except 



54f LODORE. 

that he loved her, what merit had he? And 
the interests of his affection he was willing to 
sacrifice at the altar of her wishes, though his 
life should be the oblation necessary to insure 
their accomplishment. 

This is not the description of true love on 
either side ; for, to be perfect, that sentiment 
ought to exist through the entireness of mutual 
sympathy and trust : but not the less did their 
passionate attachment engross the minds of 
both. All might have been well, indeed, had 
the lovers been left to themselves ; but friends 
and relations interfered to mar and to destroy. 
The sisters of Saville accused Lady Lodore of 
encouraging, and intending to marry, the Mar- 
quess of C . Saville instantly resolved to 

be no obstacle in the way of her ambition. 
Cornelia was fired with treble indignation to 
perceive that he at once conceded the place to 
his rival. One word or look of gentleness would 
have changed this; but she resolved to van- 
quish by other arms, and to force him to show 



LODORE. 55 

some outward sign of jealousy and resentment. 
Saville had a natural dignity of mind, founded 
on simplicity of heart and directness of purpose. 
Cornelia knew that he loved her; — on that his 
claim rested : all that might be done to embel* 
lish and elevate her existence, he would study 
to achieve ; but he could not enter into, nor 
understand, the puerile fancies of a spoiled 
Beauty : and while she was exerting all her 
powers, and succeeded in fascinating a crowd of 
flatterers, she saw Saville apart, abstracted 
from such vanities, pursuing a silent course; 
ready to approach her when her attention was 
disengaged, but at no time making one among 
her ostentatious admirers. 

There was no moment of her life in which 
Cornelia did not fully appreciate her lover's value, 
and her own good fortune in having inspired 
him with a serious and faithful attachment. 
But she imagined that this must be known and 
acknowledged ; and that to ask any demonstra- 
tion of gratitude, was ungenerous and tyrannical. 



56 LODORE. 

An untaught girl could not have acted with 
more levity and wilfulness. It was worse when 
she found that she was accused of encouraging 
a wealthier and more illustrious rival. She dis- 
dained to exculpate herself from the charge of 
such low ambition, but rather furnished new 
grounds for accusation ; and, in the arrogance 
of conscious power, smiled at the pettiness of 
the attempts made to destroy her influence. 
Proud in the belief that she could in an instant 
dispel the clouds she had conjured athwart her 
heaven, she cared not how ominously the thun- 
der muttered, nor how dark and portentous 
lowered the threatening storm. It came wlien 
she least expected it : convinced of the fallacy 
of his confidence, made miserable by her ca- 
prices, agonized by the idea tliat he only lin- 
gered to add another tropliy to his rival's 
triumph, Saville, who was always impetuous 
and precipitate, suddenly quitted England. 

This was a severe blow at first ; but soon 
Cornelia smiled at it. He would return — he 



LODORE. 57 

must. The sincerity of their mutual preference 
would overcome the petty obstacles of time and 
distance. She never felt more sure of his de- 
votion tlian now ; and she looked so happy, 
and spoke so gaily, that those who were more 
ready to discern indifference, than love, in her 
sentiments, assured the absent Saville, that 
Lady Lodore rejoiced at his absence, as having 
shaken off a burthen, and got rid of an impedi- 
ment, which, in spite of herself, was a clog to 
her brilliant career. The trusting love that 
painted her face in smiles was a traitor to itself 
and while she rose each day in the belief that 
the one was near at hand which would bring 
her lover before her, dearer and more attached 
than ever, she was in reality at work in defacing 
the whole web of life, and substituting dark, 
blank, and sad disappointment, for the images 
of light and joy with wliich her fancy painted 
it. 

Saville had been o-one five months. It was 

o 

strange that he did not return ; and she began 

D 5 



58 LODORE. 

to ponder upon how she must unbend, and 
what demonstration she must make, to attract 

him again to her side. The Marquess of C 

was dismissed ; and she visited the daughters 
of Lord Maristow, to learn what latest news 
they had received of their brother. " Do you 
know, Lady Lodore," said Sophia Saville, 
" that this is Horatio's wedding-day ? It is too 
true : we regret it, because he weds a foreigner 
— but there is no help now. He is married." 

Had sudden disease seized on the frame- 
work of her body, and dissolved and scattered 
with poisonous influence and unutterable pains, 
the atoms that composed it. Lady Lodore 
would have been less agonized, less terrified. 
A thousand daggers were at once planted in 
her bosom. Saville was false ! married ! di- 
vided from her for ever ! She was stunned : — 
scarcely understanding the meaning of the 
phrases addressed to her, and, unable to conceal 
her perturbation, she replied at random, and 
hastened to shorten her visit. 



LODORE. 55 

But no interval of doubt or hope was af- 
forded. The words she had heard were con- 
cise, true to their meaning and all-sufficing. 
Her heart died within her. What had she 
done ? Was she the cause ? She longed to 
learn all the circumstances that led to this hasty 
marriage, and whether inconstancy or resent- 
ment had impelled him to the fatal act. Yet 
wherefore ask these things ? It was over ; the 
scene was closed. It were little worth to ana- 
lyze the poison she had imbibed, since she was 
past all mortal cure. 

Her first resolve was to forget — never, never 
to think of the false one more. But her 
thoughts never wandered from his image, and 
she was eternally busied in retrospection and 
conjecture. She was tempted at one time to 
disbelieve the intelligence, and to consider it as 
a piece of malice on the part of Miss Saville ; 
then the common newspaper told her, that at 
the Ambassador's house at Naples, the Honour- 
able Horatio Saville had married Clorinda, 



60 LODORE. 

daughter of the Principe Villamarina, a Nea- 
politan nobleman of the highest rank. 
* It was true therefore — and how was it true ? 
Did he love his bride ? why else marry ? — had 
he forgotten his tenderness towards her ? Alas ! 
it needed not forgetting; it was a portion of 
past time, fleeting as time itself ; it had been 
borne away with the hours as they passed, 
and remembered as a thing which had been, 
and was no more. The reveries of love which 
for months had formed all her occupation, were 
a blank ; or rather to be replaced by the agonies 
of despair. Her native haughtiness forsook her. 
She was alone and desolate — hedged in on all 
sides by insuperable barriers, which shut out 
every glimpse of hope. She was humbled in 
lier own eyes, through her want of success, and 
heartily despised herself, and all her caprices 
and vanities, which had led her to this desart, 
and then left her to ])ine. She detested her 
position in society, her mechanism of being, and 
every circumstance, self-inherent, or adventi- 



LODORE. 61 

tious, that attended her existence. All seemed 
to her sick fancy so constructed as to ensure 
disgrace, desertion, and contempt. She lay 
down each night feeling as if she could never 
endure to raise her head on the morrow. 

The unkindness and cruelty of her lover's 
conduct next presented themselves to her con- 
templation. She had suffered much during the 
past years, more than she had ever acknow- 
ledged, even to herself; she had suffered of regret 
and sorrow, while she brooded over her solitary 
position, and the privation of every object on 
whom she might bestow affection. She had had 
nothing to^hope. Saville had changed all this ; 
he had banished her cares, and implanted hope 
in her heart. Now again his voice recalled the 
evils, his hand crushed the new-born expecta- 
tion of happiness. He was the cause of every 
ill ; and the adversity which she had endured 
proudly and with fortitude while it seemed the 
work of fate, grew more bitter and heavy when 
she felt tliat it arose through the agency of one, 



62 LODORE. 

whose kind affection and guardianship she had 
fondly believed would hereafter prove a blessing 
sent as from Heaven itself, be to the star of her 
life. 

This fit passed off; with struggles and re- 
lapses she wore down the first gush of sorrow, 
and her disposition again assumed force over 
her. She had found it difficult to persuade 
herself, in spite of facts, that she was not loved ; 
but it was easy, once convinced of the infi- 
delity of her lover, to regard him with indiffer- 
ence. She now regretted lost happiness — but 
Saville was no longer regretted. She wept 
over the vanished forms of delight, lately so 
dear to her ; but she remembered that he who 
had called them into life had driven them 
away ; and she smiled in proud scorn of his 
fleeting and unworthy passion. It was not to 
this love that she had made so tender and lavish 
a return. She had loved his constancy, his 
devotion, his generous solicitude for her wel- 
fare — for the happiness which she bestowed on 



LODORE. 63 

him, and for the sympathy that so dearly 
united them. These were fled ; and it were 
vain to consecrate herself to an empty and de- 
formed mockery of so beautiful a truth. 

Then she tried to hate him — to despise and to 
lessen him in her own estimation. The attempt 
recoiled on herself. The recollection of his worth 
stole across her memory, to frustrate her vain 
endeavours : his voice haunted — his expressive 
eyes beamed on her. It were better to forget. 
Indifference was her only refuge, and to attain 
this she must wholly banish his image from her 
mind. Cornelia was possessed of wonderful 
firmness of purpose. It had carried her on so 
long unharmed, and now that danger was at 
hand, it served effectually to defend her. She 
rose calm and free, above unmerited disaster. 
She grew proud of the power she found that 
she possessed of conquering the most tyrannical 
of passions. Peace entered her soul, and she 
hailed it as a blessing. 

The clause in her husband''s will which de- 
prived her of the guardianship of her daugliter 



64 LODORE. 

had been forgotten during this crisis. Before, 
under the supposition that she should marry, 
she had deferred taking any step to claim her. 
The idea of a struggle to be made, unassisted, 
unadvised, and unshielded, was terrible. She 
had not courage to encounter all the annoyances 
that might ensue. To get rid for a time of the 
necessity of action and reflection, she went 
abroad. She changed the scene — she travelled 
from place to place. She gave herself up in 
the solitude of continental journies to the whole 
force of contending passions; now overcome 
by despair, and again repressing regret, assert- 
ing to herself the lofty pride of her nature. 

• By degrees she recovered a healthier tone of 
mind— a distant and faint, yet genuine sense of 
duty dawned upon her; and she began to think 
on what her future existence was to depend, and 
how she could best secure some portion of hap- 
piness. Her heart once again warmed towards 
the image of her daughter — and she felt that in 
watching the development of her mind, and 
leading her to love and tlepend on her, a new 



LODORE. 65 

interest and real pleasure might spring up in 
life. She reproached herself for having so 
long, by silence and passive submission, given 
scope to the belief that she was willing to be a 
party against herself, in the injustice of Lodore ; 
and she returned to England with the intention 
of instantly enforcing her rights over her child, 
and taking to her bosom and to her fondest 
care the little being, whose affection and grati- 
tude was to paint her future life with smiles. 

She called to mind Lady Santerre's worldly 
maxims, and her own experience. She knew 
that the first step to success is the appearance 
of prosperity and power. To command the 
good wishes and aid of her friends she must 
appear independent of them. She was earnest 
therefore to hide the wounds her heart had re- 
ceived, and the real loathing with which she 
regarded all things. She arrayed herself in 
smiles, and banished, far below into the invisible 
recesses of her bosom, the contempt and disgust 
with which she viewed the scene around her. 



66 LODORE. 

She returned to England. She appeared at 
the height of the season, in the midst of society, 
as beautiful, as charming, as happy in look and 
manner, as in her days of light-hearted enjoy- 
ment. She paused yet a moment longer, to 
reflect on what step she had better take on first 
enforcing her claim ; but her mind was full of 
its intention, and set upon the fulfilment. 

At this time, but a few days after her arrival 
in London, she went to the opera. She heard 
the name of Fitzhenry called in the lobby — 
she saw and recognized Mrs. Elizabeth — the 
venerable sister Bessy, so little altered, that 
time might be said to have touched, but not 
trenched her homely kindly face. With her, 
in attendance on her, she beheld Horatio Sa- 
ville's favourite cousin — the gay and fashionable 
Edward Villiers. It was strange ; her curiosity 
was strongly excited. It had not long to lan- 
guish : the next morning Villiers called, and was 
readily admitted. 



LODORE. 67 



CHAPTER V. 

And as good lost is seld or never found. 

Shakspeare. 

Lady Lodore and Villiers met for the first 
time since Horatio Saville's marriage. Neither 
were exactly aware of what the other knew or 
thought. Cornelia was ignorant how far her 
attachment to his cousin was known to him; 
whether he shared the general belief in her 
worldly coquetry, or what part he might have 
had in occasioning their unhappy separation. 
She could not indeed see him without emotion. 
He had been Lodore's second, and received the 
last dying breath of him wlio had, in her 



68 LODORE. 

brightest youth, selected her from the world, 
to share his fortunes. Those days were long 
past ; yet as she grew older, disappointed, and 
devoid of pleasurable interest in the present, 
she often turned her thoughts backward, and 
wondered at the part she had acted. 

Similar feelings were in Edward's mind. He 
was prejudiced against her in every way. He 
despised her worldly calculations, as reported 
to him, and rejoiced in their failure. He be- 
lieved these reports, and despised her ; yet he 
could not see her without being moved at once 
with admiration and pity. The moon-lit hill, 
and tragic scene, in which he had played his 
part, came vividly before his eyes. He had 
been struck by the nobleness of Lodore's ap- 
pearance — the sensibility that sat on his counte- 
nance — his gentle, yet dignified manners. Ethel's 
idolatry of her father had confirmed the favour- 
able prepossession. He could not help com- 
passionating Cornelia for the loss of her husband, 
forgetting, for the moment, tlieir separation. 



LODORE. 69 

Then again recurred to him the eloquent ap- 
peals of Saville ; his eulogiums ; his fervent, 
reverential affection. She had lost him also. 
Could she hold up her head after such miserable 
events ? The evidence of the senses, and the 
ideas of our own minds, are more forcibly pre- 
sent, than any notion we can form of the feelings 
of others. In spite, therefore, of his belief in 
her heartlessness, Villiers had pictured Cornelia 
attired in dismal weeds, the victim of grief. He 
saw her, beaming in beauty, at the opera ; — he 
now beheld her, radiant in sweet smiles, in her 
own home. Nothing touched — nothing harmed 
her; and the glossy surface, he doubted not, 
imaged well the insensible, unimpressive soul 
within. 

Lady Lodore would have despised herself 
for ever had she betrayed the tremor that shook 
her frame when Villiers entered. Her pride of 
sex was in arms to enable her to convince him, 
that no regret, no pining, shadowed her days. 
The reality was abhorrent, and should never 



70 LODORE. 

be confessed. Thus then they met— each with 
a whole epic of woe and death alive in their 
memory ; but both wearing the outward appear- 
ance of frivolity and thoughtlessness. He saw 
her as lovely as ever, and as kind. Her 
softest and sweetest welcome was extended 
to him. It was this frequent show of frank 
cordiality which gained her ''golden opinions'" 
from the many. Her haughtiness was all of 
the mind ; — a desire to please, and constant 
association with others, had smoothed the sur- 
face, and painted it in the colours most agree- 
able to every eye. 

They addressed each other as if they had 
met but the day before. At first, a few ques- 
tions and answers passed, — as to where she had 
been on the continent, how she liked Baden, 
&c. ; — and then Lady Lodore said — " Although 
I liave not seen her for several years, I instantly 
recognized a relative of mine with you yester- 
day evening. Does Miss Fitzhenry make any 
stay in town.?" 



LODORE. 71 

The idea of Ethel was uppermost in Villiers's 
mind, and struck by the manner in which the 
woman of fashion spoke of her daughter, -he re- 
plied, " During the season, I believe ; I scarcely 
know. Miss Fitzhenry came up for her health ; 
that consideration, I suppose, will regulate her 
movements." 

" She looked very well last night — perhaps 
she intends to remain till she gets ill, and coun- 
try air is ordered ?''^ observed Lady Lodore. 

" That were nothing new at least,'' replied 
Villiers, trying to hide the disgust he felt at her 
mode of speaking ; " the young and blooming 
too often protract their first season, till the 
roses are exchanged for lilies."** 

" If Miss Fitzhenry's roses still bloom," said 
the lady, " they must be perennial ones ; they 
have surely grown more fit for a herbal than 
a vase." 

Villiers now perceived his mistake, and re- 
plied, " You are speaking of Mrs. Elizabeth 
Fitzhenry, as the good lady styles herself — I 
spoke of — her niece — " 



72 LODORE. 

* Mas Ethel been ill?" Lady Lodore's hur- 
ried question, and the use of the christian name, 
as most familiar to her thoughts, brought home 
to Villiers's heart the feeling of their near 
relationship. There was something more than 
grating ; it was deeply painful to speak to a mo- 
ther of a child who had been toni from her — 
who did not know — who had even been taught 
to hate her. He wished himself a hundred 
miles off, but there was no help, he must reply. 
'* You might have seen last night that she is 
perfectly recovered." 

Lady Lodore's imagination refused to image 
her child in the tall, elegant, full-formed girl 
she had seen, and she said, " Was Ethel with 
you ? I did not see her — probably she went 
home before the opera was over, and I only 
perceived your party in the crush-room — you 
appear already intimate." 

'* It is impossible to see Miss Fitzhenry and 
not to wish to be intimate," replied Villiers 
with his usual frankness. " I, at least, cannot 



LODORE. 73 

help being deeply interested in every thing that 
relates to her."' 

" You are very good to take concern in my 
little girl. I should have imagined that you 
were too young yourself to like children." 

" Children !" repeated Villiers, much amaz- 
ed ; " Miss Fitzhenry ! — she is not a child." 

Lady Lodore scarcely heard him ; a sudden 
pang had shot across her heart, to think how 
strangers — how every one might draw near her 
daughter, and be interested for her, while she 
could not, without making herself the tale of the 
town, the subject, through the medium of news- 
papers, for every gossip's tea-table in England — 
where her sentiments would be scanned, and her 
conduct criticized — and this through the revenge- 
ful feelings of her husband, prolonged beyond 
the grave. Tears had been gathering in her eyes 
during the last moments; she turned her head 
to hide them, and a quick shower fell on her 
silken dress. Quite ashamed of this self-betrayal, 
she exerted herself to overcome her emotio)ii. 

VOL. II. E 



74 LODORE. 

Villiers felt awkwardly situated ; his first im- 
pulse had been to rise to take her hand, to 
soothe her ; but before he could do more than 
the first of these acts, as Lady Lodore fancied 
for the purpose of taking his leave, she said, 
" It is foolish to feel as I do; yet perhaps more 
foolish to attempt to conceal from one, as well 
acquainted as you are with every thing, that I 
do feel pained at the unnatural separation be- 
tween me and Ethel, especially w hen I think of 
the publicity I must incur by asserting a mo- 
ther's claims. I am ashamed of intruding this 
subject on you ; but i>he is no longer the baby 
cherub I could cradle in my arms, and you 
have seen her lately, and can tell me whether 
she has been well brought up — whether she 
seems tractable— if she promises to be pretty ?'"* 

" Did you not think her lovely r"' cried 
Villiers with animation ; " you saw her last 
night, taking my arm."" 

" Ethel!" cried the lady. " Could that be 
Ethel? True, she is now sixteen — 1 had in- 



LODORE. 75 

deed forgot" — her cheeks became suffused with 
a deep blush as she remembered all thesolicisms 
she had been committing. " She is sixteen," 
she continued, " and a woman — while I fancied 
a little girl in a white frock and blue sash : this 
alters every thing. We have been indeed 
divided, and must now remain so for evermore. 
I will not injure her, at her age, by making her 
the public talk — besides, many, many other 
considerations would render me fearful of 
making myself responsible for her future des- 
tiny." 

" At least,"*' said Villiers, " she ought to 
wait on you." 

" That were beyond Lord Lodore's bond," 
said the lady ; " and why should she wait on 
me ? Were she impelled by affection, it were 
well. But this is talking very simply — we could 
only be acquaintance, and I would rather be 
nothing. I confess, that I repined bitterly, 
that I was not permitted to have my little girl, 
as I termed her, for my plaything and com- 

E 2 



76 LODORE. 

panion — but my ideas are now changed: a 
dear little tractable child would have been de- 
lightful -but she is a woman, with a will of her 
own — prejudiced against me — brought up in 
that vulgar America, with all kinds of strange 
notions and ways. Lord Lodore was quite 
right, I believe — he fashioned her for himself 
and — Bessy. The worst thing that can happen 
to a girl, is to have her prejudices and principles 
unhinged ; no new ones can flourish like those 
that have grown with her growth ; and mine, I 
fear, would differ greatly from those in wliich 
she has been educated. A few vears hence, she 
may feel the want of a friend, who understands 
the world, and who could guide her prudentlv 
through its intricacies ; then she shall find that 
friend in me. Now, I feel convinced that I 
should do more harm than good." 

A loud knock at the street door interrupted 
the conversation. " One thing only I cannot 
endure," said the lady hastily, " to present a 
domestic tragedy or farce to the Opera House — 



LODORE. 77 

we must not meet in public. I shall shut up 
my house and return to Paris." 

Mere written words express little. Lady 
Lodore's expressions were nothing; but her 
countenance denoted a change of feeling, a vio- 
lence of emotion, of which Villiers hardly be- 
lieved her capable ; but before he could reply, 
the servant threw open the door, and her brow 
immediately clearing, serenity descended on her 
face. With her blandest smile she extended her 
hand to her new visitor. Villiers was too much 
discomposed to imitate her, so with a silent 
salutation he departed, and cantered round the 
park to collect his thoughts before he called in 
Seymour-street. 

The ladies there were not less agitated than 
Lady Lodore, and displayed their feelings with 
the artlessness of recluses. The first words 
that Mrs. Elizabeth had addressed to ner niece, 
at the breakfast table, were an awkwardly ex- 
pressed intimation, that she meant instantly to 
return to Longfield. Ethel looked up with a 



78 LODORE. 

face of alarm; her aunt continued ; "I do not 
want to speak ill of Lady l^odore, my dear — 
God forgive her — that is all I can say. What 
your dear father thought of her, his last will 
testifies. I suppose you do not mean to disobey 
him."^ 

" His slightest word was ever a law with 
me,"' said Ethel ; " and now that he is gone, I 
would observe his injunctions more religiously 
than ever. But — " 

" Then, my dear, there is but one thing to 
be done : Lady Lodore will assuredly force her- 
self upon US;, meet us at every turn, oblige you 
to pay her your duty ; nor could you avoid it. 
No, my dear Ethel, there is but one escape — 
your health, thank God, is restored, and Long- 
field is now in all its beauty ; we will return to- 
morrow.*" 

Ethefflid not reply ; she looked very discon- 
solate — she did not know what to say ; at last, 
" Mr. Villiers will think it so odd," dropped 
from her lips. 



LODORE. 79 

" Mr. Villiers is nothing to us, my dear," 
said aunt Bessy — " not the most distant rela- 
tion ; he is an agreeable, good-hearted young gen- 
tleman — but there are so many in the world/"* 

Ethel left her breakfast untasted and went 
out of the room : she felt that she could no 
longer restrain her tears. " My father !"" she 
exclaimed, while a passionate burst of weeping 
choked her utterance, " my only friend ! why, 
why did you leave me ? Why, most cruel, 
desert your poor orphan child ? Gracious God ! 
to what am I reserved ! I must not see my 
mother — a name so* dear, so sweet, is for me a 
tiirse and a misery ! O my father, why did 
you desert me !" 

Her calm reflections were not less bitter ; she 
did not suffer her thoughts to wander to Villiers, 
or rather the loss of her father was still so much 
the first grief of her heart, that on any new sor- 
row, it was to this she recurred with agony. 
The form of her youthful mother also flitted be- 
fore her ; and she asked herself, " Can she be so 



80 LODORE. 

wicked ?" Lord Lodore had never uttered her 
name ; it was not until his death had put the 
fatal seal on all things, that she heard a garbled 
exaggerated statement from her aunt, over 
whose benevolent features a kind of sacred horror 
mantled, whenever she was mentioned. The 
will of Lord Lodore, and the stern injunc- 
tion it contained, that the mother and daughter 
should never meet, satisfied Ethel of the truth 
of all that her aunt said ; so that educated 
to obedience and deep reverence for the only 
parent she had ever known, she recoiled 
with terror from transgressing his commands, 
and holding communication with the cause 
of all his ills. Still it was hard, and very, 
very sad ; nor did she cease from lamenting her 
fate, till Villiers's horse was heard in the street, 
and his knock at the door; then she tried to 
compose herself. " He will surely come to us 
at Longfield," she thought ; ** Longfield will 
be so very stupid after London." 

After London ! Poor Ethel ! she had lived 



LODORE. 81 

in London as in a desert ; but lately it had ap- 
peared to her a city of bliss, and all places else 
the abode of gloom and melancholy. Villiers 
was shocked at the appearance of sorrow which 
shadowed her face ; and. for a moment, thought 
that the rencounter with her mother was the 
sole occasion of the tears, whose traces he 
plainly discerned. His address was full of sym- 
pathetic kindness; — but when she said, ''We 
return to-morrow to Essex — will you come to 
see us at Longfield .^"*'' — his soothing tones 
were exchanged for those of surprise and vexa- 
tion. 

" Longfield !— impossible ! Why .?" 
" My aunt has determined on it. She thinks 
me recovered ; and so, indeed, I am.'"* 

" But are you to be entombed at Longfield, 
except when dying ? If so, do, pray, be ill 
again directly ! But this must not be. Dear 
Mrs. Fitzhenry," he continued, as she came 
in, " I will not hear of your going to Longfield. 
Look ; the very idea has already thrown Miss 

E 5 



82 LODORE. 

Fitzhenry into a consumption ; — you will kill 
her. Indeed you must not think of it/' 

" We shall all die, if we stay in town," said 
Mrs. Elizabeth, with perplexity at her niece's 
evident suffering. 

" Then why stay in town .'*" asked Villiers. 

"You just now said, that we ought not to 
return to Longfield," answered the lady ; " and 
I am sure if Ethel is to look so ill and wretch- 
ed, I don't know what I am to do." 

" But there are many places in the world be- 
sides either London or Longfield. You were 
charmed with Richmond the other day : there 
are plenty of houses to be had there ; nothing 
can be prettier or more quiet." 

" Well, I don't know," said Aunt Bessy, " I 
never thought of that, to be sure ; and I have 
business which makes our going to Longfield 
very inconvenient. I expect Mr. Humphries, 
our solicitor, next week ; and I have not seen 
him yet. Vou really think, Mr. Villiers, that 
we could get a house to suit us at Richmond ?'' 



LODORE. 83 

" Let us drive there to-day," said Villiers ; 
" we can dine at the Star and Garter. You can 
go in the britzska — I on horseback. The days 
are long : we can see every thing ; and take 
your house at once." 

This plan sounded very romantic and wild to 
the sober spinster ; but Ethel's face, lighted up 
with vivid pleasure, said more in its favour, 
than what the good lady called prudence could 
allege against it. " Silly people you women 
are,'' said Villiers : " you can do nothing by 
yourselves : and are always running against 
posts, unless guided by others. This will make 
every thing easy — dispel every difficulty." His 
thoughts recurred to Lady Lodore, and her in- 
tended journey to Paris, as he said this: and 
again they flew to a charming little villa on the 
river's side, whither he could ride every day, 
and find Ethel among her floweis, alone and 
happy. 

The excursion of this morning was prosperous. 
The day was warm yet frc sh ; and as they 



84 LODOKE. 

quitted town, and got surrounded by fields, and 
hedges, and trees, nature reassumed her rights, 
and awakened transport in EtheVs heart. The 
boyish spirits of Villiers communicated them- 
selves to her ; and Mrs. Elizabeth smiled, also, 
with the most exquisite complacency. A few 
inquiries conducted them to a pretty rural box, 
surrounded by a small, but well laid-out shrub- 
bery ; and this they engaged. The dinner at 
the inn, the twilight walk in its garden ; — the 
fair prospect of the rich and cultivated countrv, 
with its silvery, meandering river at their feet ; 
and the aspect of tlis cloudless heavens, where 
one or two stars silently struggled into sight 
amidst the pathless wastes of sky, were objects 
most beautiful to look on, and prodigal of the 
sweetest emotions. The wide, dark lake, the 
endless forests, and distant mountains, of the 
lUinois, were not here ; but night bestowed that 
appearance of solitude, which habit rendered 
dear to Ethel ; and imagination could transform 
wooded parks and well-trimmed meadows into 



LODORE. 85 

bowery seclusions, sacred from the foot of man, 
and fresh fields, untouched by his hand. 

A few days found Ethel and her aunt in- 
stalled at their little villa, and delighted to 
be away from London. Education made lone- 
liness congenial to both : they might seek 
transient amusements in towns, or visit them 
for business ; but happiness, the agreeable tenor 
of unvaried daily life, was to be found in the 
quiet of the country only ; — and Richmond was 
the country to them; for, cut off from all habits 
of intercourse with their species, they had but 
to find trees and meadows near them, at once to 
feel transported, from the thick of human life, 
into the most noiseless solitude. 

Ethel was very happy. She rose in the morn- 
ing with a glad and grateful heart, and gazed 
from her chamber window, watching the early 
sunbeams as they crept over the various parts 
of the landscape, visiting with light and warmtli 
each open field or embowered nook. Her bosom 
overflowed with the kindest feelings, and her 



8G LODORE. 

charmed senses answered the tremulous beating 
of her pure heart, bidding it enjoy. How beau- 
tiful did earth appear to her ! There was a 
delight and a sympathy in the very action of 
the shadows, as they pranked the sunshiny 
ground with their dark and fluctuating forms. 
The leafy boughs of the tall trees waved grace- 
fully, and each wind of heaven wafted a thou- 
sand sweets. A magic spell of beauty and bliss 
held in one bright chain the whole harmonious 
universe ; and the soul of the enchantment was 
love —simple, girlish, unacknowledged love ; — 
the love of the young, feminine heart, which 
feels itself placed, all bleakly and dangerously, 
in a world, scarce formed to be its liome, and 
which plumes itself with Love to fly to the 
covert and natural shelter of another's protect- 
ing care. 

Ethel did not know — did not fancy — that she 
was in love ; nor did any of the throes of pas- 
sion disturb the serenity of her mind. She only 
ft'lt tliat she was very, very happy ; and that 



LCD OR?:. 87 

Viiiiers was the kindest of human beings. She 
did not give herself up to idleness and reverie. 
The first law of her education had been to be 
constantly employed. Her studies were various: 
they, perhaps, did not sufficiently tend to invi- 
gorate her understanding, but they sufficed to 
prevent every incursion of listlessness. Mean- 
while, during each, the thought of Viiiiers 
strayed through her mind, like a heavenly visit- 
ant, to gild all things with sunny delight. Some 
time, during the da}^, he was nearly sure to 
come; or, at least, she was certain of seeino- 
him on the morrow ; and wlien he came, their 
boatings and their rides were prolonged ; wliile 
each moment added to the strength of the ties 
that bound her to him. She relied on his friend- 
ship; and his society was as necessary to her 
life, as the air she breathed. She so implicitly 
trusted to his truth, tliat she was unaware that 
she trusted at all — never making a doubt about 
it. That chance, or time, should injure or 
break off the tie, was a possibility that never sug- 



88 LODORE. 

gested itself to her mind. As the silver Thames 
traversed in silence and beauty the landscape at 
her feet, so did love flow through her soul 
in one even and unruffled stream — the great 
law and emperor of her thoughts; yet more felt 
from its influence, than from any direct exertion 
of its power. It was the result and the type of 
lier sensibility, of her constancy, of the gentle, 
yet lively sympathy, it was her nature to be- 
stow, with guileless confidence. Those around 
her might be ignorant tliat her soul was imbued 
with it, because, being a part of her soul, there 
was small outward demonstration. None, in- 
deed, near her thought any thing about it : 
Aunt Bessy was a tyro in such matters; and 
Viiliers — he had resolved, when he perceived 
love on her side, to retreat for ever : till then 
he might enjoy the dear delight that her soci- 
ety afforded him. 



LODORE. 89 



CHAPTER VI. 

Alas! he knows 
The laws of Spain appoint me for his heir ; 
That all must come to me, if I outlive him. 
Which sure I must do, by the course of nature. 

Beaumont and Fletcher. 

Edward Villiers was the only child of a man 
of considerable fortune, who had early in life 
become a widower. From the period of this 
event, Colonel Villiers (for his youth had been 
passed in the army, where he obtained promo- 
tion) had led the careless life of a single man. 
His son's home was at Maristow Castle, when 
not at school ; and the father seldom remem- 
bered him except as an incumbrance ; for his 



90 LODORi:. 

estate was strictly entailed, so that he could 
only consider himself possessed of a life interest 
in a property, which would devolve, without 
restriction, on his more fortunate son. 

Edward was brought up in all the magnifi- 
cence of his uncle's lordly abode. Luxury 
and profusion were the elements of the air he 
breathed. To be without any desired object 
that could be purchased, appeared baseness and 
lowest penury. He, also, was considered the 
favoured one of fortune in the family circle. 
The elder brother among the Savilles rose 
above, but the younger fell infinitely below, 
the undoubted heir of eight thousand a year, 
and one of the most delightful seats in England. 
He was brought up to look upon himself as a 
rich man, and to act as such ; and meanwhile, 
until his father's death, he had nothing to de- 
pend on, except any allowance he might make 
Inm. 

Colonel Villiers was a man of fashion, addicted 
to all the extravagances and even vices of the 



LODORE. 91 

times. He set no bounds to his expenses. 
Gambling consumed his nights, and his days 
were spent at horse-races, or any other occupa- 
tion that at once excited and impoverished him. 
His income was as a drop of water in the 
mighty stream of his expenditure. Involvement 
followed involvement, until he had not a shilling 
that he could properly call his own. 

Poor Edward heard of these things, but did 
not mark them. He indulged in no blame- 
worthy pursuits, nor spent more than beseemed 
a man in his rank of life. The idea of debt 
was familiar to him : every one — even Lord 
Maristow — was in debt, far beyond his power 
of immediate payment. He followed the uni- 
versal example, and suffered no inconvenience, 
while his wants were obligingly supplied by the 
fashionable tradesmen. He regarded the period 
of his coming of age as a time when he should 
become disembarrassed, and enter upon life with 
ample means, and still more brilliant pros])ccts. 

The day arrived. It was celebrated with 



92 LODOIIE. 

Splendour at Maristow Castle. Colonel Villiers 
was abroad ; but Lord Maristow wrote to him 
to remind him of this event, which otherwise he 
might have forgotten. A kind letter of con- 
gratulation was, in consequence, received from 
him by Edward ; to which was appended a 
postscript, saying, that on his return, at the end 
of a few weeks, he would consult concerning 
some arrangements he wished to make with re- 
gard to his future income. 

His return was deferred ; and Edward began 
to experience some of the annoyances of debt. 
Still no real pain was associated with his feelings; 
though he looked forward with eagerness to the 
hour of liberation. Colonel Villiers came at last. 
He spoke largely of his intended generosity, 
which was shown, meanwhile, by his persuading 
Edward to join in a mortgage for the sake of 
raising an immediate sum. Edward scarcely 
knew what he was about. He was delighted to 
be of service to his father ; and without thought 
or idea of haviuG^ made a sacrifice, agreed to all 



LODORE. 93 

that was asked of him. He was proniised an 
allowance of six hundred a year. 

The few years that had passed since then 
were full of painful experience and bitter initia- 
tion. His light and airy spirit was slow to con- 
ceive ill, or to resent wrong. When his annuity 
remained unpaid, he listened to his father's ex- 
cuses with implicit credence, and deplored his 
poverty. One day, he received a note from 
him, written, as usual, in haste and confusion, 
but breathing anxiety and regret on his account, 
and promising to pay over to him the first 
money he could obtain. On the evening of that 
day, Edward was led by a friend into the gam- 
bling room of a celebrated club. The first man 
on whom his eyes fell, was his father, wlio was 
risking and losing rouleaus and notes in abun- 
dance. At one moment, while making over a 
large sum, he suddenly perceived his son. He 
grew pale, and then a deep blush spread itself 
over his countenance. Edward withdrew. His 
young heart was pierced to tlie core, 'i lie con- 
sciousness of a father's falsehood and guilt 



94 LODORE. 

acted on him as the sudden intelligence of some 
fatal disaster would have done. He breathed 
thick — the objects swam round iiim — he hurried 
into the streets — he traversed them one after the 
other. It was not this scene alone — this single 
act ; the veil was withdrawn from a whole series 
of others similar ; and he became aware that his 
parent had stepped beyond the line of mere ex- 
travagance ; that he had lost honourable feeling ; 
that lies were common in his mouth ; and every 
other — even his only child — was sacrificed to 
his own selfish and bad passions. 

Edward never again asked his father for 
money. The immediate result of the meeting 
in the gambling- room, had been his receiving a 
portion of what was due to liim ; but his an- 
nuity was always in arrear, and paid so irre- 
gularly, that it became worse than nothing 
in his eyes ; especially, as the little that he 
received was immediately paid over to cre- 
ditors, and to defray the interest of borrowed 
money. 

He never applied again to Colonel Villiers. 



LODORE. \)o 

He would have considered himself guilty of a 
crime, had he forced his father to forge fresh 
subterfuges, and to lie to his own son. Brought 
up in the midst of the wealthy, he had early 
imbibed a horror of pecuniary obligation ; and 
this fastidiousness grew more sensitive and pe- 
remptory with each added day of his life. Yet 
with all this, he had not learnt to set a right 
value upon money; and he squandered what- 
ever he obtained with thoughtless profusion. 
He had no friend to whose counsel he could re- 
cur. Lord Maristow railed against Colonel 
Villiers ; and when he heard of Edward's diffi- 
culties, offered to remonstrate and force his 
brother-in-law to extricate him : but here ended 
his assistance, which was earnestly rejected. 
Horatio's means were exceedingly limited ; but 
on a word from his cousin, he eagerly besought 
him to have recourse to his purse. To avoid 
his kindness, and his uncle's interference, Ed- 
ward became reserved : he had recourse to Jews 
and money-lenders; and appeared at ease, while 



9G LODORE. 

lie was involving himself in countless and still 
increasing embarrassments. 

Edward was naturally extravagant ; or, to 
speak more correctly, his education and position 
implanted and fostered habits of expense and pro- 
digality, while his careless disposition was unapt 
to calculate consequences : his very attempts at 
economy frequently cost him more than his mo^t 
expensive whims. He was not, like his father, 
a gambler; nor did he enter into any very re- 
prehensible pleasures : but he had little to 
spend, and was thoughtless and confiding ; and 
being always in arrear, was forced, in a certain 
way, to continue a system which perpetually 
led him further into the maze, and rendered hi> 
return impossible. He had no hope of becom- 
ing independent, except through his father's 
death : Colonel Villiers, meanwhile, had no idea 
of dying. He w as not fifty years of age ; antl 
considering his own a better life than his son's, 
involuntarily speculated on what he should do 
if he should chance to survive him. He was a 



LODORE. 97 

handsome and a fashionable man : he often me- 
ditated a second marriage, if he could render it 
advantageous ; and repined at his inability to 
make settlements, which was an insuperable 
impediment to his project. Edward's death 
would overcome this difficulty. Such were the 
speculations of father and son ; and the portion 
of filial and paternal affection which their rela- 
tive position but too usually inspires. 

Until he was twenty -one, Edward had never 
spent a thought upon his scanty resources. 
Three years had past since then — three brief 
years, which had a little taught him of what 
homely stuff the world is made ; yet care and 
even reflection had not yet disturbed his repose. 
Days, months sped on, and nothing reminded 
him of his relative wealth or poverty in a way 
to annoy him, till he knew Ethel. He had been 
interested for her in America — he had seen her, 
young and lovely, drowned in grief — sorrowing 
with the heart's first prodigal sorrow for her 
adored father. He had left her, and thought of 

VOL. II. F 



98 LODORE. 

her no more — except, as a passing reflection, that 
in the natural course of things, she was now to 
become the pupil of Lady Lodore, and conse- 
quently, that her unsophisticated feelings and 
affectionate heart would speedily be tarnished 
and hardened under her influence. He antici- 
pated meeting her hereafter in ball-rooms and 
assemblies, changed into a flirting, giddy, yet 
worldly-minded girl, intent upon a good esta- 
blishment, and a fashionable partner. 

He encountered her under the sober and 
primitive guardianship of Mrs. Fitzhenry, un 
changed and unharmed. The same radiant in- 
nocence beamed from her face ; her sweet voice 
was still true and heart-reaching in its tones ; 
her manner mirrored the purity and lustre of a 
mind incapable of guile, and adorned with everv 
generous and gentle sentiment. Hedrew near her 
with respect and admiration, and soon no other 
object showed fair in his eyes except Ethel. 
She was the star of the world, and he felt happy 
only wlien tlie light of her presence shone upon 



LODORE. 99 

him. Her voice and smile visited his dreams, 
and spoke peace and delight to his heart. She 
was to him as a jewel (yet sweeter and lovelier 
than any gem) shut up in a casket, of which he 
alone possessed the key — as a pearl, of whose 
existence an Indian diver is aware beneath the 
waves of ocean, deep buried from every other 
eye. 

There was all in Ethel that could excite and 
keep alive imaginative and tender love. In 
characterizing a race of women, a delightful 
writer has described her individually. " She 
was in her nature a superior being. Her ma- 
jestic forehead, her dark, thoughtful eye, as- 
sured you that she had communed with herself. 
She could bear to be left in solitude — yet what 
a look was her's if animated by mirth or love ! 
She was poetical, if not a poet ; and her ima- 
gination was high and chivalrous." * The ele- 
vated tone of feeling fostered by her father, her 
worship of his virtues, and the loneliness of her 

* Coleridge's " Six Months in the West Indies." 

r 2 



100 LODOKE. 

life in the Illinois, connbined to render her dis- 
similar to any girl Villiers had ever before 
known or admired. When unobserved, he 
watched her countenance, and marked the vary- 
ing tracery of high thoughts and deep emotions 
pass over it ; her dark eye looked out from 
itself on vacancy, but read there a meaning 
only to be discerned by vivid imagination. And 
then when that eye, so full of soul, turned on him, 
and affection and pleasure at once animated and 
softened its glances — when her sweet lips, so 
delicate in their shape, so balmy and soft in 
their repose, were wreathed into a smile — he 
felt that his whole being was penetrated with 
enthusiastic admiration, and that his nature had 
bent to a law, from which it could never again 
be liberated. 

That she should minjjlc with the world — 
enter into its contaminating pursuits— be talked 
of in it with that spirit of depreciation and im- 
pertinence, which is. its essence, was odious to 
him, and he was overjoyed to have her safe at 



LODORE. 101 

Richmond — secure from Lady Lodore — shut 
up apart from all things, except nature — her 
unsophisticated aunt, and his own admiration — 
a bird of beauty, brpoding in its own fair nest, 
unendangered by the fowler. These were his 
feelings ; but by degrees other reflections forced 
themselves on him ; and love which, when it 
has knocked and been admitted, ivill be a ty- 
rant, obliged him to entertain regrets and fears 
which agonized him. His hourly aspiration 
was to make her his own. Would that dear 
heart open to receive into its recesses his image, 
and thenceforward dedicate itself to him only ? 
Might he become her lover, guardian, husband 
— and they tread together the jungle of life, 
aiding each other to thread its mazes, and to ward 
off every danger that might impend over them. 

Bitter worldly considerations came to mar 
the dainty colours of this fair picture. He 
could not conceal from himself the poverty tliat 
must attend him during his father's life. Lonl 
Lodore's singular will reduced Ethel's property 



102 LODORE. 

to almost nothing : should he then ally her 
to his scanty means and broken fortune ? His 
resolution was made. He would not deny him- 
self the present pleasure of seeing her, to spare 
any future pain in which he should be the only 
sufferer ; but on the first token of exclusive re- 
gard on her side, he would withdraw for ever. 



LODORE. 103 



CHAPTER VII 

The world is too much with us. 

Wordsworth. 

Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzheniiy's morning task 
was to read the newspapers — the only intercourse 
she held with the world, and all her knowledge 
of it, was derived from these daily sheets. Ethel 
never looked at them — her thoughts held no 
communion with the vulgar routine of life, and 
she was too much occupied by her studies and 
reveries to spend any time upon topics so un- 
interesting as the state of the nation, or the 
scandal of the day. 



104 LODORE. 

One morning, wliile she was painting, her 
aunt observed, in her usual tone of voice, scarce 
lifting her eyes from the paper, " Mr. Villiers 
did not tell us this — he is going to be married ; 
I wonder who to !" 

" Married !" repeated Ethel. 

" Yes, my dear, here it is. * AVe hear from 
good authority that Mr. Villiers, of Chiverton 
Park, is about to lead to the hymeneal altar a 
young and lovely bride, the only child of a gen- 
tleman, said to be the richest commoner in Eng- 
land.' — Who can it be ?" 

Ethel did not reply, and the elder lady went 
on to other parts of the newspaper. The poor 
girl, on whom she had dealt all unaware this 
chance mortal blow, put down her brush, and 
hurried into the shrubbery to conceal her agi- 
tation. Why did she feel these sharp pangs ? 
Why did a bitter deluge of anguish overflow 
and seem to choke her breathing, and torture 
her heart ? — she could scarcely tell. '' Married ! 
— then I shall never see him more r And a pas- 



LODORE. 105 

sion of tears, not refreshing, but forced out by 
agony, and causing her to feel as if her heart 
was bursting, shook her delicate frame. At 
that moment the well-known sound, the gallop- 
ing of Villiers's horse up the lane, met her ear. 
" Does he come here to tell us at last of his 
wedding-day ?'' The horse came on — it stopped 
— the bell was rung. Little acts these, which 
she had watched for, and listened to, for two 
months, with such placid and innocent delight, 
now they seemed the notes of preparation for a 
scene of despair. She wished to retreat to her 
own room to compose herself; but it was too 
late ; he was already in that through which she 
must pass — she heard his voice speaking to her 
aunt. " Now is he telling her," slie thought. 
No idea of reproach, or of accusation of 
unkind ness in him, dawned on her heart. No 
word of love had passed between them — even 
yet she was unaware that she loved herself; 
it was the instinctive result of tliis despot sen- 

V 5 



106 L ODD RE. 

timent, which exerted its sway over her, with- 
out her being conscious of the cause of her 
sufferings. 

The first words of !Mrs. Fitzhenry had been 
to speak of the paragraph in the newspaper, 
and to show it her visitor. Villiers read it, 
and considered it curiously. He saw at once, 
that however blunderingly worded, his father 
was its hero ; and he wondered what foundation 
there might be for the rumour. " Singular 
enough !" he said, carelessly, as he put the 
paper down. 

" You have kept your secret well,"" said Mrs. 
Elizabeth. 

" My secret ! I did not even know that I 
had one." 

" I, at least, never heard that you were going 
to be married." 

" I .'—married ! Where is Miss Fitzhenry .?'' 

The concatenation of ideas presented by these 
words fell unremarked on the blunt senses of 
the good lady, and she replied, " In the shrub- 



LODORE. 107 

bery, I believe, or upstairs : she left me but a 
moment ago."" 

Villiers hastened to the garden and soon dis- 
cerned the tearful girl, who was bending down 
to pluck and arrange some flowers, so to hide 
her disturbed countenance. 

Could we, at the moment of trial, summon 
our reason and our foregone resolves — could we 
put the impression of the present moment at a 
distance, which, on the contrary, presses on us 
with a power as omnipotent over our soul, as a 
pointed sword piercing the flesh over our life, 
we might become all that we are not — angels 
or demigods, or any other being that is not hu- 
man. As it is, the current of the blood and 
the texture of the brain are the machinery by 
which the soul acts, and their mechanism is by 
no means tractable or easily worked ; once put 
in motion, we can seldom controul their opera- 
tions ; but our serener feelings are whirled into 
the vortex they create. Thus Edward Villiers 
had a thournnd times in his reveries thought 



108 LODORE. 

over tlie possibility of a scene occurring, such 
as the one he was called upon to act in now — 
and had planned a line of conduct, but, like 
mist before the wind, this gossamer of the mind 
was swept away by an immediate appeal to his 
heart through his outward sensations. There 
stood before him, in all her loveliness, the crea- 
ture whose image had lived with him by day 
and by night, for several long months; and the 
gaze of her soft tearful eyes, and the faultering 
tone of her voice, were the laws to which his 
sense of prudence, of right, was immediately 
subjected. 

A few confused sentences interchanged, re- 
vealed to him that she participated in her aunt's 
mistake, and her simple question, " AYhy did 
you conceal this from me ?"' spoke tlie guile- 
lessness of her thoughts, while the anguish 
which her countenance expressed, betrayed that 
the concealment was not the only source of her 
grief. 

This young pair were ignorant how dear 



LODORE. 109 

they were to each other. EtheFs affection was 
that generous giving away of a young lieart 
which is unaware of the value of the gift it 
makes — she had asked for and thought of no 
return, though her feeling was the result of a 
reciprocal one on his side ; it was the instinctive 
love of the dawn of womanhood, subdued and 
refined by her gentle nature and imaginative 
mind. Edward was more alive to the nature of 
his own sentiments — but his knowledg-e stood 
him in no stead to fortify him against the power 
of Ethel's tears. In a moment they understood 
each other — one second sufficed to cause the be- 
fore impervious veil to fall at their feet : they 
had stept beyond this common-place world, and 
stood beside each other in the new and mysteri- 
ous region of which Love is emperor. 

" Dearest Ethel," said Villiers, " I have 
much to tell you. Do arrange that we should 
ride together. I have very much to tell you. 
You shall know every thing, and judge for us 
both, though you should condemn me." 



110 lodorf:. 

She looked up in his face with innocent sur- 
prise; but no words could destroy the sunshine 
that brightened her soul : to know that she was 
loved sufficed then to fill her being to overflow- 
ing with happiness, so that there was no room 
for a second emotion. 

The lovers rode out together, and thus se- 
cured the tete-a-tete which Villiers especially 
yearned for. Although she was country-bred, 
Mrs. Fitzhenry was too timid to mount on 
horseback, yet she could not feel fear for her 
niece who, under her father's guidance, sat her 
steed with an ease and perfect command of 
the animal, which long liabit rendered second 
nature to her. As they rode on, consider- 
ably in advance of the groom, they were 
at first silent — the deep sweet silence which is 
so eloquent of emotion — till with an effort, 
slackening his pace, and bringing his horse 
nearer, Villiers began. He spoke of debt, of 
difficulties, of poverty — of his unconquerable 
aversion to tlie making any demands on his 



LODORE. Ill 

father — fruitless demands, for he knew how in- 
volved Colonel Villiers was, and how incapable 
even of paying the allowance he nominally 
made his son. He declared his reluctance to 
drag Ethel into the sea of cares and discomforts 
that he felt must surround his youth. He be- 
sought her forgiveness for having loved her — 
for having linked her heart to his. He could 
not willingly resign her, while he believed that 
he, all unworthy, was of any worth in her eyes ; 
but would she not discard him for ever, now 
that she knew that he was a beggar ? and that 
all to which he could aspire, was an engage- 
ment to be fulfilled at some far distant day — 
a day that might never come — when fortune 
should smile on him. Ethel listened with ex- 
quisite complacency. Every word Villiers spoke 
was fraught with tenderness; his eye beamed 
adoration and sincerest love. Consciousness 
chained her tongue, and her faltering voice re- 
fused to frame any echo to the busy instigations 
of her virgin heart. Yet it seemed to her as if 



112 LODORE. 

she must speak ; as if she were called upon to 
avow how light and trivial were all worldly 
considerations in her eyes. With bashful con- 
fusion she at length said, " You cannot think 
that I care for fortune— I was happy in the 
Illinois." 1 

Her simplicity of feeling was at this moment i 
infectious. It appeared the excess of selfish- 
ness to think of any tiling but love in a desart | 
— while she had no desire beyond. Indeed, in 
England or America, she lived in a desart, as 
far as society was concerned, and felt not one 
of those tenacious though cobweb-seeming ties, 
that held sway over Villiers. All his explana- 
tions therefore went for nothing. They only 
felt that this discourse concerning him had 
drawn them nearer to each other, and had laid 
the first stone of an edifice of friendship, lience- 
fortli to be raised beside the already established I 
one of love. A sudden shower forced them also 
to return home with speed, and so interrupted 
any further discussion. 



LODORE. 113 

In the evening Villiers left them ; and Ethel 
sought, as speedily as she might, the solitude 
of her own chamber. She had no idea of hiding 
any circumstance from Mrs. Fitzhenry ; but 
confidence is, more than any other thing, a 
matter of interchange, and cannot be bestowed 
unless the giver is certain of its being received. 
They had too little sympathy of taste or idea, 
and were too little in the habit of communi- 
cating their inmost thoughts, to make Ethel re- 
cur to her aunt. Besides, young love is ever 
cradled in mystery ;— to reveal it to the vulgar 
eye, appears at once to deprive it of its celestial 
loveliness, and to marry it to the clodlike 
earth. But alone — alone — she could think over 
the past day — recall its minutest incident ; and 
as she imaged to herself the speaking fondness 
of her lover's eyes, her own closed, and a thril- 
ling sense of delight swept through her frame. 
What a different world was this to what it had 
been the day before ! The whole creation was 
invested by a purer atmosphere, balmy as para- 



114 j.oDOJii:. 

disc, which no disquieting thought could pene- 
trate. She called upon her father's spirit to 
approve her attachment ; and when she reflected 
tliat Edward's hand had supported his dying 
head— that to Edward Villiers's care his latest 
words had intrusted her,— she felt as if she were 
a legacy bequeathed to liini, and that she ful- 
filled Lodore's last behests in giving herself to 
him. So sweetly and fondly did her gentle 
heart strive to make a duty of her wishes; and 
the idea of her father's approbation set the seal 
of perfect satisfaction on her dream of bliss. 

It was somewhat otherwise with Villiers. 
Things went on as bifore, and he came nearly 
every day to Richmond ; but wliile Ethel rested 
satisfied with seeing him, and receiving slight, 
cherished tokens of his unabated regard, — as 
his voice assumed a more familiar tone, and his 
attentions became more affectionate; — while 
these were enough for Ethel, he thought of the 
future, and saw it each day dressed in gloomier 
colours. In Ethel's presence, indeed, he forgot 



l.ODORE. 115 

all but lier. He loved her fervently, and beheld 
in her all that he most admired in woman : her 
clearness of spirit, her singleness of heart, her 
unsuspicious and ingenuous disposition, were 
irresistibly fascinating; — and why not spend 
their lives thus in solitude ? — his — their mutual 
fortune might afford this : — why not for ever 
thus — the happy — the beloved ? — his life might 
pass like a dream of joy ; and that paradise 
might be realized on earth, the impossibility of 
which philosophers have demonstrated, and 
worldlings scoffed at. 

Thus he thought while in the same room with 
Ethel ; — while on his evening ride back to town, 
her form glided before him, and her voice 
sounded in his ears, it seemed that where Ethel 
was, no one earthly bliss could be wanting ; 
where she was not, a void must exist, dark and 
dreary as a starless night. But his progress 
onward took him out of the magic circle her 
presence drew ; a portion of his elevated feeling 
deserted him at each step ; it fell off, like tlie 



116 LODORE. 

bark pealing from a tree, in successive coats, 
till he was left with scarce a vestige of its bright- 
ness ; — as the hue and the scent deserts the 
flower, when deprived of light, — so, when away 
from Ethel, her lover lost half the excellence 
which her presence bestowed. 

Edward Villiers was eminently sociable in his 
disposition. He had been brought up in the 
thick of life, and knew not how to live apart 
from it. His frank and cordial heart danced 
within his bosom, when he was among those 
who sympathized with, and liked him. He wa* 
much courted in society, and had many fa- 
vourites : and how Ethel would like tliese, and 
be Hked by them, was a question he perpetually 
asked himself. He knew the worldliness of 
many, — their defective moral feeling, and their 
narrow views ; but he believed that they were 
attached to him, and no man was ever less a 
misantlirope than he. He wished, if married to 
Ethel, to sec her a favourite in his own circle ; 
but he revolted from the idea of presenting her, 



LODORE. 117 

except under favourable auspices, surrounded 
by the decorations of rank and wealth. To 
give up the world, the English world, formed 
no portion of his picture of bliss ; and to occupy 
a subordinate, degraded, permitted place in it, 
was, to one initiated in its supercilious and inso- 
lent assumptions, not to be endured. 

The picture had also a darker side, which 
was too often turned towards him. If he felt 
hesitation when he regarded its brighter aspect, 
as soon as this was dimmed, the whole current 
of his feelings turned the other way ; and he 
called himself villain, for dreaming of allying 
Ethel, not to poverty alone, but to its worst 
consequences and disgrace, in the shape of debt. 
" I am a beggar," he thought ; " one of many 
wants, and unable to provide for any ; — the 
most poverty-stricken of beggars, who has 
])ledged away even his liberty, were it claimed 
of him. I look forward to the course of years 
with disffust. I cannot calculate the ills that 
may occur, or with how tremendous a weight 



118 LODORE. 

the impending ruin may fall. I can bear it 
alone ; but did I see her humiliated, whom I 
would gladly place on a throne, — by heavens ! 
I could not endure life on such terms ! and a 
pistol, or some other dreadful means, would put 
an end to an existence become intolerable." 

As these thoughts fermented within him, he 
longed to pour them out before Ethel ; to un- 
load his mind of its care, to express "^the sincere 
affection that led him to her side, and yet urged 
him to exile himself for ever. He rode over 
each day to Richmond, intent on such a design ; 
but as he proceeded, the fogs and clouds that 
thickened roilnd his soul grew lighter. At first 
his pace was regulated ; as he drew nearer, he 
pressed his horse's flank with impatient heel, 
and bounded forward. Each turn in the read 
was a step nearer the sunshine. Now the bridge, 
the open field, the winding lane, were passed ; 
the walls of her abode, and its embowered win- 
dows, presented themselves ; — they met ; and 
the glad look that welcomed him drove far 



LODORE. 119 

away every thought of banishment, and dis- 
pelled at once every remnant of doubt and de- 
spondency. 

This state of things might have gone on much 
longer, — already had it been protracted for two 
months, — but for an accidental conversation 
between Lady Lodore and Villiers. Since the 
morning after the opera, they had scarcely seen 
each other. Edward's heart was too much oc- 
cupied to permit him to join in the throng of 
a ball-room ; and they had no chance of meet- 
ing, except in general society. One evening, at 
the opera, the lady who accompanied Lady 
Lodore, asked a gentleman, who had just come 
into their box, " What had become of Edward 
Villiers?— he was never to be seen?" 

" He is going to be married," was the reply : 
"he is in constant attendance on the fair lady at 
Richmond." 

" I had not heard of this," observed Lady 
Lodore, who, for Horatio'*s sake, felt an interest 
for his favourite cousin. 



120 LODORE. 

"It is very little known. The fiancee lives 
out of the world, and no one can tell any thing 
about her. I did hear her name. Young Cray- 
croft has seen them riding together perpetually 
in Richmond Park and on AVimbledon Common, 
he told me. Miss Fitzroy — no; — ^liss Fitz- 
something it is; — Fitzgcorge.'' — no ; — Fitz- 
henry ? — yes ; Miss Fitzhenry is the name." 

Cornelia reddened, and asked no more ques- 
tions. She controlled her agitation ; and at 
first, indeed, she was scarcely aware how much 
she felt: but while the wliole house was listen- 
ing to a favourite air, and her thoughts had 
leisure to rally, tlioy came on her painfully, 
and involuntary tears filled her eyes. It was 
sad, indeed, to hear of her child as of a stranger; 
and to be made to feel sensibly how wide the 
gulf was that separated them. " ^ly sweet 
girl — my own Ethel 1— are you, indeed, so lost 
to nie.^"' As her heart breathed this ejacula- 
tion, she felt the downy cheek of her babe close 
to her's, and its little fingers press her bosom. 



LODORE. 121 

A moment's recollection brought another image : 
— Ethel, grown up to womanhood, educated in 
hatred of her, negligent and unfilial; — this was 
not the little cherub whose loss she lamented. 
Let her look round the crowd then about her ; 
and among the fair girls she saw, any one was 
as near her in affection and duty, as the child 
so early torn from her, to be for ever estranged 
and lost. 

The baleful part of Cornelia's character was 
roused by these reflections ; her pride, her self- 
will, her spirit of resistance. " And for this 
she has been taken from me," she thought, " to 
marry, while yet a child, a ruined man — to be 
wedded to care and indigence. Thus would it 
not have been had she been entrusted to me. 
O, how hereafter she may regret the injuries of 
her mother, when she feels the effects of them in 
her own adversity ! It is not for me to prevent 
this ill-judged union. The aunt and niece would 
see in my opposition a motive to hasten it : wise 
as they fancy themselves — wise and good — what 

VOL. II. 6 



122 LODORE. 

I, the reviled, reprobated, they would therefore 
pursue with more eagerness. Be it so — my 
day will yet come !" 

A glance of triumph shot across her face as 
she indulged in this emotion of revenge ; the 
most deceitful and reprehensible of human feel- 
ings — revenge against a child — how sad at best 
— how sure to bring with it its recompense of 
bitterness of spirit and remorse ! But Cornelia's 
heart-had been rudely crushed, and in the ruin 
of her best affections, her mother had substitut- 
ed noxious passions of many kinds — pride chief 
of all. 

While thus excited and indignant, she saw 
Edward Villiers. He came into her box ; the 
lady with her was totally unaware of what had 
been passing in her thoughts, nor reverted to 
the name mentioned as having any connexion 
with her. She asked Villiers if it were true 
that he was going to be married ? Lady Lo- 
dore heard the question ; she turned on him her 
eyes full of significant meaning, and with a 



LODORE. 123 

smile of scorn answered for him, " O yes, ]\Ir. 
Villiers is going to be married. His bride is 
young, beautiful, and portionless ; but he has 
the tastes of a hermit — he means to emigrate to 
America — his simple and inexpensive habits are 
admirably suited to the wilderness.'" 

This was said as if in jest, and answered in 
the same tone. The third in the trio joined in, 
quite unaware of the secret meaning of the con- 
versation. Several bitter allusions were made 
by Lady Lodore, and the truth of all she said 
sent her words home to Edward"'s heart. She 
drew, as if playfully, a representation of high- 
bred indigence, that made his blood curdle. 
As if she could read his thoughts, she echoed 
their worst suggestions, and unrolled the page of 
futurity, such as he had often depicted it to him- 
self, presenting in sketchy, yet forcible colours, 
a picture from which his soul recoiled. He 
would have escaped, but there was a fascination 
in the topic, and in the very bitterness of spirit 
which she awakened. He rather encouraged her 

g2 



124 LODORE. 

to pioceedj while he abhorred her for so doing, 
acknowledging the while the justice of all she 
said. Lady Lodore was angry, and she felt 
pleasure in the pain she inflicted ; her wit be- 
came ke-ner, her sarcasm more pointed, yut 
stopping short with care of any thing that 
should betray her to their companion, and avoid- 
ing, with inimitable tact, any expression that 
should convey to one not in the secret, that 
she meant any thing more than raillery or good- 
humoured quizzing, as it is called. 

At length Villiers took his leave. " "Were I," 
he said, '' the unfortunate man you represent 
me to be, you would have to answer for my life 
this night. But re-assure yourself — it is all a 
dream. I have no thoughts of marrying ; and 
the fair girl, whose fate as my wife Lady Lo- 
dore so kindly compassionates, is safe from 
every danger of becoming the victim of my 
selfishness and poverty." 

This was said laughing, yet an expressive in- 
tonation of voice conveyed his full meaning to 



LODORE. 325 

C.'ornelia. " I have done a good deed if I have 
prevented this marriage," she thought ; " yet 
a thankless one. After all, he is a gentleman, 
and under sister Bessy's guardianship, poor 
Ethel might fall into worse hands." 

While Lady Lodore thus dismissed her anger 
and all thought of its cause, Villiers felt more 
resentment than had ever before entered his kind 
lieart. The truths which the lady had spoken 
were impalatable, and the mode in which they 
were uttered was still more disagreeable. He 
hated her for having discovered them, and for 
presenting them so vividly to his sight. At one 
moment he resolved never to see Ethel more ; 
while he felt that he loved her with ten- 
fold tenderness, and would have given worlds 
to become the source of all happiness to her — 
wishing this the more ardently, because her mo- 
ther had pictured him as being the cause to her 
of every ill. 

Edward's nature was very impetuous, but 
perfectly generous. The tempest of anger 



126 LODORE. 

allayed, he considered all that Lady Lodore 
had said impartially ; and while he felt that she 
had only repeated what he had told himself a 
thousand times, he resolved not to permit resent- 
ment to controul him, and to turn him from the 
right path. He felt also, that he ought no 
longer to delay acting on his good resolutions. 
His intercourse with Miss Fitzhenry had begun 
to attract attention, and must therefore cease. 
Once again he would ride over to Richmond — 
once again see her — say farewell, and then 
stoically banish every pleasant dream^-every 
heart-enthralling hope — willingly sacrificing his 
dearest wishes at the shrine of her welfare. 



LODORE. 127 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Sho to a window came, that opened west. 
Towards which coast her love his way addrest, 
There looking forth, she in her heart did find 

Many vain fancies working her unrest. 
And sent her winged thoughts more swift than wind 
To bear unto her love the message of her mind. 

The Faerie Queen. 

EtheLj happy in her seclusion, was wholly 
unaware of her mother''s interference and its 
effects. She had not the remotest suspicion that 
it would be considered as conducive to her wel- 
fare to banish the only friend that she had in the 
world. In her solitary position, life was a blank 
without Edward ; and while she congratulated 
lierself on her good fortune in the concurrence 
of circumstances that had brought them to- 



128 LODORE. 

gether, and, 'as she believed, established her hap- 
piness on the dearest and most secure founda- 
tions, she was far from imagining that he was 
perpetually revolving the necessity of bidding 
her adieu for ever. If she had been told two 
years before, that all intercourse between her 
and her father were to cease, it would scarcely 
have seemed more unnatural or impossible, than 
that such a decree should be issued to divide 
her from one to whom her young heart was en- 
tirely given. She relied on him as the support 
of her life — her guide and protector — she loved 
liim as the giver of good to her — she almost 
worshipped him for the many virtues, which 
he either really possessed, or with which her 
fondness bounteously gifted him. 

Meanwhile the unacute observations of Mrs. 
Fitzhenry began to be awakened. She gave her- 
self great credit for discovering that there was 
something singular in the constant attendance of 
Edward, and yet, in fact, she owed lier illumina- 
tion on this point to her man of law. Mr. 
Humphries, whom slie had seen on business the 



LODORE. 129 

day before, finding how regular a visitor Villiers 
was, and their only one, first elevated his eye- 
brows and then relaxed into a smile, as he said, 
" I suppose I am soon to wish Miss Fitzhenry 
joy." This same day Edward had ridden down 
to them ; a violent storm prevented his return 
to tow n ; he slept at the inn and breakfasted 
with the ladies in the morning. There was some- 
thing familiar and home-felt in his appearance 
at the breakfast-table, that filled Ethel with de- 
light. " Women," says the accomplished author 
of Paul Clifford, " think that they must always 
love a man whom they have seen in his night- 
cap." There is deep philosophy in this observa- 
tion, and it was a portion of that feeling which 
made Ethel feel so sweetly complacent, when 
Villiers, unbidden, rang the bell, and gave his 
orders to the servant, as if he had been at home. 
Aunt Bessy started a little; and while the 
young people were strolling in the shrubbery 
and renewing the flowers in the vases, she was 
pondering on the impropriety of their position, 

G 5 



130 LODORE. 

and wondering how she could break off an in- 
timacy she had hitherto encouraged. But one 
way presented itself to her plain imagination, 
the old resource, a return to Longfield. Witli 
light heart and glad looks, Ethel bounded up 
stairs to dress for dinner, and she was twining 
her ringlets round her taper fingers before the 
glass, when her aunt entered with a look of 
serious import. " My dear Ethel, I have some- 
thing important to say to you." 

Ethel stopped in her occupation and turned 
inquiring eyes on her aunt ; " My dear," con- 
tinued Mrs. Fitzhenry, " we have been a long 
time away ; if you please, we will return to 
Longfield." 

This time Ethel did not grow pale; she 
turned again to the mirror, saying with a smile 
that lighted her whole countenance, " Dear 
aunt, that is impossible — I would rather not." 

No negative could have been more imposing 
on the good lady than this ; she did not know- 
how to reply, how to urge her wisli. " Dearest 



LODORE. 131 

aunt," continued her niece, " you are losing 
time — dinner will be announced, and you are 
not dressed. We will talk of Longfield to-mor- 
row — we must not keep Mr. Villiers waiting." 

It was often the custom of Aunt Bessy, 
like the father of Hamlet, to sleep after dinner, 
she did not betake herself to her orchard, but 
her arm-chair, for a few minutes' gentle doze. 
Ethel and Villiers meanwhile walked out, and, 
descending to the river side, they were enticed 
by the beauty of the evening to go upon the 
water. Ethel was passionately fond of every 
natural amusement ; boating was a pleasure that 
she enjoyed almost more than any other, and 
one with which she was seldom indulged ; for 
her spinster aunt had so many fears and objec- 
tions, and considered every event but sitting 
still in her drawing-room, or a quiet drive with 
her old horses, as so fraught with danger and 
difficulty, that it required an absolute battle 
ever to obtain her consent for her niece to go on 
the river — she would have died before she could 



132 LODORE. 

have entered a boat herself, and, walking at the 
water's edge, she always insisted that Ethel 
should keep close to the bank, while, by the re> 
petition of expressions of alarm and entreaties 
to return, she destroyed every possibility of 
enjoyment. 

The river sped swiftly on, calm and free. 
There is always life in a stream, of which a lake 
is frequently deprived, when sleeping beneath a 
windless sky. A river pursues for ever its 
course, accomplishing the task its Creator has 
imposed, and its waters are for ever changing 
while they seem the same. It was a balmy sum- 
mer evening ; the air seemed to brood over the 
earth, warming and nourishing it. All nature 
reposed, and yet not as a lifeless thing, but 
with tlic same enjoyment of rest as gladdened 
the hearts of the two beings, who, with grati- 
tude and love, drank in the influence of this 
softest hour of day. The equal splash of the 
oar, or its dripping when suspended, the clear 
reflection of tree and lawn in the river, the very 



LODORE. 133 

colour of the stream, stolen as it was from hea- 
ven itself, the plash of the wings of the water- 
fowl who skimmed the waves towards their rushy 
nests, — every sound and every appearance was 
beautiful, harmonious, and soothing. Ethel's 
soul was at peace ; grateful to Heaven, and 
satisfied with every thing around her, a ten- 
derness beamed from her eyes, and was dif- 
fused over her attitude, and attuned her voice, 
which acted as a spell to make Edward forget 
every thing but herself. 

They had both been silent for some time, 
a sweet silence more eloquent than any words, 
when Ethel observed, " My aunt wishes to re- 
turn to Longfield." 

Villiers started as if he had trodden upon a 
serpent, exclaiming, '* To Longfield ! O yes ! 
that were far best — when shall you go .'"' 

" Why is it best ? Why should we go f'' 
asked Ethel with surprise. 

" Because," replied Villiers impetuously, 
" it had been better that you had never left it — 
that we had never met ! It is not thus tliat I 



^34} LODORE. 

can fulfil my promise to your father to guard 
and be kind to his child. I am practising on 
your ignorance, taking advantage of your lone- 
liness, and doing you an injury, for which I 
should call any other a villain, were he guilty." 
It was the very delight that Edward had 
been a moment before enjoying, the very beauty 
and calmness of nature, and the serenity and 
kindness of the sweet face turned towards him, 
which stirred such bitterness ; checking him- 
self, however, he continued after a pause, in a 
more subsided tone. 

" Are there any words by which I can lay bare 
my heart to you, Ethel ? — None ! To speak of 
my true and entire attachment, is almost an in- 
sult ; and to tell you, that I tear myself from you 
for your own sake, sounds like impertinence. Yet 
all this is true ; and it is the reverence that I 
have for your excellence, the idolatry which 
your singleness of heart and sincere nature in- 
spires, which prompts me to speak the truth, 
though that be different from the usual language 
of gallantry, or what is called love. 



LODORE. 135 

'* Will you hate me or pity me most, when I 
speak of my determination never to see you 
more ? You cannot guess how absolutely I am 
a ruined man — how I am one of those despic- 
able hangers-on of the rich and noble, who 
cover my rags with mere gilding. I am a 
beggar — I have not a shilling that I can call 
my own, and it is only by shifts and meannesses 
that I can go on from day to day, while each 
one menaces me with a prison or flight to a 
foreign country. 

'' I shall go— and you will regret me, Ethel, 
or you will despise me. It were best of all that 
you forgot me. I am not worthy of you — no 
man could be; that I have known you and 
loved you — and for your sake, banished myself 
from you, will be the solitary ray of comfort 
that will shed some faint glow over my chilled 
and darkened existence. Will you say even 
now one word of comfort to me ?" 

Ethel looked up ; the pure afFectionateness of 
her heart prevented her from feeling for herself, 



136 LODORE. 

she thought only of her lover. " Would that I 
could comfort you," she said. " You will do 
what you think right, and that will be your 
best consolation. Do not speak of hatred, or 
contempt, or indifference. I shall not change 
though we part for ever : how is it possible 
that I should ever cease to feel regard for one 
who has ever been kind, considerate, and gene- 
rous to me ? Go, if you think it right — I am 
a foolish girl, and know nothing of the world ; 
and I will not doubt that you decide for the 
best.^' 

Villiers took her hand and held it in his; 
his heart was penetrated by her disinterested 
self-forgetfulness and confidence. He felt that 
he was loved, and that he was about to part 
from her foy ever. The pain and pleasure of 
these thoughts mingled strangely — he had no 
words to express them, he felt that it would be 
easier to die than to give her up. 

Aunt Bessy, on tlie river's bank imploring 
their return, recalled them from tlie fairy region 



LODORE. 13T 

to which their spirits had wandered. For one 
moment they had been united in sentiment ; one 
kindred emotion of perfect affection had, as it 
Avere, married their souls one to the other ; 
at the alien sound of poor Bessy's voice the spell 
fled away on airy wings, leaving them disen- 
chanted. The rudder was turned, the boat 
reached the shore, and unable to endure frivol- 
ous talk about any subject except the one so 
near his heart, Villiers departed and rode back 
to town, miserable yet most happy — despairing 
yet full of joy; to such a riddle, love, which 
finds its completion in sympathy, and knows 
no desire beyond, is the only solution. 

The feelings of Ethel were even more un- 
alloyed. She had no doubts about the future, 
the present embraced the world. She did not 
attempt to unravel the dreamy confusion of her 
thoughts, or to clear up the golden mist that 
hung before, curtaining most gloriously tlie 
reality beyond. Her step was buoyant, her 
eyes sparkling and joyous. Love and gladness 



138 LODORE. 

sat lightly on her bosom, and gratitude to Hea- 
ven for bestowing so deep a sense of happiness 
was the only sentiment that mingled with 
these. Villiers, on leaving them, had promised 
to return the next day ; and on the morrow she 
rose, animated with such a spirit as may be 
kindled within the bosom of an Enchantress, 
when she pronounces the spell which is to con- 
troul the movements of the planetary orbs. 
She was more than queen of the world, for she 
was empress of Edward"'s heart, and ruling there, 
she reigned over the course of destiny, and bent 
to her will the conflicting elements of life. 

He did not come. It was strange. Now hope, 
now fear, were interchanged one for the other, 
till night and certain disappointment arrived. 
Yet it was not much — the morrow's sun would 
light him on his way to her. To cheat the 
lagging hours of the morrow, she occupied her- 
self with her painting and music, tasking herself 
to give so many hours to lier employments, 
thus to add speed to the dilatory walk of time. 



LODORE. 139 

The long day was passed in fruitless expecta- 
tion — another and another succeeded. Was he 
ill ? What strange mutation in the course of 
nature had occurred to occasion so inexplicable 
an absence ? 

A week went by, and even a second was 
nearly spent. She had not anticipated this 
estrangement. Day by day she went over in 
her mind their last conversation, and Edward's 
expressions gathered decision and a gloomy 
reality as she pondered on them. The idea of 
an heroic sacrifice on his part, and submission 
to his will on hers, at first soothed her — but 
never to see him more, was an alternative that 
tasked her fortitude too high ; and while her 
heart felt all the tumults of despair, she found 
herself asking what his love could be, that could 
submit to lose her ? Love in a cottage is the 
dream of many a high-born girl, who is not 
allowed to dance with a younger brother at Al- 
mack's; but asccluded, an obscure, an almost cot- 
tage life, was all that Ethel had ever known, and 



140 LODORE. 

all that she coveted. Villiers rejected this— not 
for her sake, that could not be, but for the sake 
of a world, which he called frivolous and vain, 
and yet to whose tyranny he bowed. To dis- 
entwine the tangled skein of thought which was 
thus presented, was her task by day and night. 
She awoke in the morning, and her first thought 
was, *' Will he come ?'' She retired at night, 
and sleep visited her eyes, while she was asking 
herself, " Why has he not been ?'*^ During the 
day, these questions, in every variety, forced 
her attention. To escape from her aunt, to 
seek solitude, to listen to each sound that might 
be his horse, and to feel her heart sicken at the 
still renewed disappointment, became, in spite 
of herself, all her occupation : she might bend 
over her drawing, or escape from her aunt's con- 
versation to the piano ; but tliese were no 
longer employments, but rather means adopted 
to deliver herself up more entirelv to her re- 
veries. 

Tiie third, the fourth week came, and the 



LODORE. 141 

silence of death was between Ethel and her 
friend. O but for one word, one look to break 
the spell ! Was she indeed never to see him 
more ? Was all, all over ? — was the harmony 
their two hearts made, jarred into discord ? — 
was she again the orphan, alone in the world ? — 
and was the fearless reliance she had placed upon 
fate and Edward's fidelity, mere folly or in- 
sanity ? — and was desecration and forgetfulness 
to come over and to destroy the worship she had 
so fondly cherished ? Nothing had she to turn 
to — nothing to console her. Her life became 
one thought, it twined round her soul like a 
serpent, and compressed and crushed every 
other emotion with its folds. '* I could bear 
all," she thought, " were I permitted to see him 
only once again." 

She and Mrs. Fitzhenry were invited by 
Mrs. Humphries to dine with her. They were 
asked to the awful ceremony of spending a long 
day, which, in the innocence of her heart, Mrs. 
Fitzhenry fancied the most delightful thing in 
the world. She thought that kindness and 



142 LODORE. 

friendship deinanded of her that she should 
be in Montague-square by ten in the morning. 
Notwithstanding every exertion, she could not 
get there till two, and then, when luncheon 
was over, she wondered why the gap of time till 
seven appeared so formidable. This was to be 
got over by a drive in Hyde-park. Ethel had 
shown peculiar pleasure in the idea of visiting 
London ; she had looked bright and happy 
during their journey to town, but anxiety and 
agitation clouded her face, at the thought of the 
park, of the crisis about to arrive, at the doubt 
and hope she entertained of finding Villiers 
there. 

The park became crowded, but he was not in 
the drive ; at length he entered in the midst 
of a Jjevy of fair cousins, whom Ethel did 
not know as such. He entered on horseback, 
flanked on either side by pretty equestrians, 
looking as gay and light-hearted, as she 
would have done, had she been one, the chosen 
one among his companions. Twice he passed. 
The first time his head was averted— he saw 



LODOHE. 143 

nothing, she even did not see his face : the 
next time, his eye caught the aspect of the 
well-known chariot — he glanced eagerly at 
those it contained, kissed his hand, and went 
on. Ethel's heart died within her. It was all 
over. She was the neglected, the forgotten ; 
but while she turned her face to the other window 
of the carriage, so to hide its saddened expres- 
sion from her companion, a voice, the dearest, 
sweetest voice she had ever heard, the soft har- 
monious voice, whose accents were more me- 
lodious than music, asked, " Are you in town? 
have you left Richmond?" In spite of herself, 
a smile mantled over her countenance, dimpling 
it into gladness, and she turned to see the be- 
loved speaker who had not deserted her — who 
was there; she turned, but there was no 
answering glance of pleasure in the face of 
Villiers — he looked grave, and bowed, as if in 
this act of courtesy he fulfilled all of friendly 
interchange that was expected of him, and rode 
off. He was gone — and seen no more. 



144 LODORE. 



CHAPTER IX. 

Sure, when the separation has been tried. 
That we, who part in love, shall meet again. 

WOKDSWOBTH. 

This little event roused Ethel to the neces- 
sity of struggling with the sentiment to which 
hitherto she had permitted unquestioned power. 
There had been a kind of pleasure mingled 
with her pain, while she believed that she 
suffered for her lover's sake, and in obedi- 
ence to his will. To love in solitude and ab- 
sence, was, she well knew, the lot of many 
of her sex, and all that is imaginative and ten- 
der lends poetry to the emotion. But to 



LODORE. 145 

love without return, her father had taught her 
was shame and folly — a dangerous and undigni- 
fied sentiment that leads many women into acts 
of humiliation and misery. He spoke the more 
warmly on this subject, because he desired to 
guard his daughter by every possible means from 
a fate too common. He knew the sensibility and 
constancy of her nature. He dreaded to think 
that these should be played upon, and that her 
angelic sweetness should be sacrificed at the 
altar of hopeless passion. That all the powers 
he might gift her with, all the fortitude and all 
the pride that he strove to instil, might be in- 
sufficient to prevent this one grand evil, he too 
well knew ; but all that could should be done, 
and his own high-souled Ethel should rise un- 
injured from the toils of the snarer, the heartless 
game of the unfaithful lover. 

She steeled her heart against every softer 
thought, she tasked herself each day to devote 
her entire attention to some absorbing employ- 
ment; to languages and the composition of mu- 

VOL. II. H 



146 LODORE. 

sic, as occupations that would not permit her 
thoughts to stray. She felt a pain deep-seated 
in her inmost heart ; but she refused to acknow- 
ledge it. When a thought, too sweet and bit- 
ter, took perforce possession of the chambers of 
her brain, she drove it out with stern and un- 
shaken resolve. She pondered on the best 
means to subdue every rebel idea. She rose 
with the sun, and passed much time in the open 
air, that when night came, bodily fatigue might 
overpower mental regrets. She conversed with 
her aunt again about her dear lost father; 
that, by renewing images, so long the only ones 
dear to her, every subsec^uent idea might be 
driven from the place it had usurped. Al- 
ways she was rewarded by the sense of doing 
right, often by really mitigating the anguish 
which rose and went to rest with her, and 
awakening her in the morning, stung her to re- 
new her endeavours, while it whispered too 
audibly, " I am here.'"* She grew pale and 
thin, and her eyes again resumed that lustre 



LODORE. 147 

which spoke a quick and agitated life within. 
Her endeavours, by being unremitting, gave too 
much intensity to every feeling, and made her 
live each moment of her existence a sensitive, 
conscious life, wearing out her frame, and 
threatening, while it accelerated the pulses, to 
exhaust betimes the animal functions. 

She felt this ; and she roused herself to con- 
tend afresh with her own heart. As a last re- 
source she determined to quit Richmond. Her 
struggles, and the energy called into action by 
her fortitude, gave a tone of superiority to her 
mind, which her aunt felt and submitted to. 
Now when a change of residence was determined 
upon, she at once negatived the idea of return- 
ing to Longfield — yet whither else betake them- 
selves ? Ethel no longer concealed from herself 
that she and the worthy spinster were solitary 
wanderers on earth, cut off from human inter- 
course. A bitter sense of desolation had crept 
over her from the moment that she knew herself 
to be deserted by Villiers. All that was bright in 

h2 



148 LODORE. 

her position darkened into shadow. She shrunk 
into herself when she reflected, that should 
the ground at her feet open and swallow her, 
not one among her fellow-creatures would be 
sensible that the whole universe of thought and 
feeling, which emanated from her breathing spi- 
rit, as water from a living spring, was shrunk 
up and strangled in a narrow, voiceless grave. 
A short time before she had regarded death 
without terror, for her father had been its prey, 
and his image was often shadowed forth in her 
fancy, beckoning her to join him. Now it had 
become more difficult to die. Nature and love 
were wedded in her mind, and it was a bitter 
pang for one so young to bid adieu to both for 
ever. Turning her thoughts from Villiers, she 
would have been glad to discover any link that 
might enchain her to the mass. She reverted to 
her mother. Her inexperience, her youth, and 
the timidity of her disposition, prevented her 
from making any endeavour to break through 
the wall of unnatural separation raised between 



LODORE. 149 

them. She could only lament. One sign, one 
word from Lady Lodore, would have been balm 
to her poor heart, and she would have met it 
with fervent gratitude. But she feared to offend. 
She had no hope that any advance would have 
been met by other than a disdainful repulse ; 
and she shrunk from intruding herself on her 
unwilling parent. She often wept to think that 
there was none near to support and comfort her, 
and yet that at the distance of but a few miles 
her mother lived — whose very name was the 
source of the dearest, sweetest, and most cruel 
emotions. She thought, therefore, of her sur- 
viving parent only to despair, and to shrink 
with terror from the mere possibility of an ac- 
cidental meeting. 

She earnestly desired to leave England, which 
had treated her with but a step-mother's wel- 
come, and to travel away, she knew not whither. 
Yet most she wished to go to Italy. Her father 
had often talked of taking her to that country, 
and it was painted in her eyes with the hues of 



150 LODORE. 

paradise. She spoke of her desire to her aunt, 
who thought her mad, and believed that it was 
as easy to adventure to the moon, as for two 
solitary women to brave alps and earthquakes, 
banditti and volcanoes, a savage people and an 
unknown land. Still, even while she trembled 
at the mere notion, she felt that Ethel might 
lead her thither if she pleased. It is one of the 
most beneficent dispensations of the Creator, 
that there is nothing so attractive and attaching 
as affection. The smile of an infant may com- 
mand absolutely, because its source is in de- 
pendent love, and the human heart for ever 
yearns for such demonstration from another. 
What would this strange world be without that 
" touch of nature?" It is to the immaterial 
universe, what light is to the visible creation, 
scent to the flower, hue to the rainbow ; hope, 
joy, succour, and self-forgetfulness, where other- 
wise all would be swallowed up in vacant and 
obscure egotism. 

No one could approach Ethel without feeling 



LODORE. 151 

that she possessed an irresistible charm. The 
overflowing and trusting afFectionateness of her 
nature was a loadstone to draw all hearts. Each 
one felt, even without knowing wherefore, that 
it was happiness to obey, to gratify her. Thus 
while a journey to Italy filled Mrs. Elizabeth 
with alarm, a consent hovered on her lips, be- 
cause she felt that any risk was preferable to 
disappointing a wish of her gentle niece. 

And yet even then Ethel paused. She began 
to repent her desire of leaving the country in- 
habited by her dearest friend. She felt that 
she should have an uncongenial companion in 
her aunt — the child of the wilderness and the 
good lady of Longfield, were like a living and 
dead body in conjunction — the one inquiring, 
eager, enthusiastic even in her con tern plative- 
ness, sensitively awake to every passing object ; 
while the other dozed her hours away, and 
fancied that pitfalls and wild beasts menaced 
her, if she dared step one inch from the beaten 
way. 

At this moment, while embarrassed by the 



152 LODORE. 

very yielding to her desires, and experiencing 
a lingering sad regret for all that she was about 
to leave behind, Ethel received a letter from 
Villiers. Her heart beat, and her fingers 
trembled, when first she saw, as now she held 
a paper, which might be every thing, yet might 
be nothing to her ; she opened it at last, and 
forced herself to consider and understand its 
contents. It was as follows : — 

" Dear Miss Fitzhenry*, 
" Will your aunt receive me with her wonted 
kindness when I call to-morrow ? I fear to 
have offended by an appearance of neglect, 
while my heart has never been absent from 
Richmond. Plead my cause, I entreat you. I 
leave it in your hands. 

" Ever and ever yours, 

" Edward Villiers." 
Grosvenor Square, Saturday. 

" Dearest Ethel, have you guessed at my 
sufferings ? Shall you hail with half the joy 



LODORE. 153 

that I do, a change which enables you to revoke 
the decree of absence so galling at least to one 
of us ? If indeed you have not forgotten me, T 
shall be rewarded for the wretchedness of these 
last weeks." 

Ethel kissed the letter and placed it near her 
heart. A calm joy diffused itself over her 
mind ; and that she could indeed trust and be- 
lieve in him she loved, was the source of a grate- 
ful delight, more medicinal than all the balmy 
winds of Italy and its promised pleasures. 

When Villiers had last quitted Richmond, 
he had resolved not to expose himself again to 
the influence of Ethel. It was necessary that 
they should be divided — how far better that 
they should never meet again ! He was not 
worthy of her. Another, more fortunate, would 
replace him, if he sacrificed his own selfish feel- 
ings, and determinately absented himself from 
her. As if to confirm his view of their mutual 
interest, his elder cousin, Mr. Saville, had just 

H 5 



154 LODORE. 

offered his hand to the daughter of a wealthy 
Earl, and had been accepted. Villiers took refuge 
from his anxious thoughts among his pretty cou- 
sins, sisters of the bridegroom, and with them the 
discussion of estates, settlements, princely man- 
sions, and equipages, was the order of the day. 
Edward sickened to reflect how opposite would 
be the prospect, if his marriage with Ethel were 
in contemplation. It was not that a noble esta- 
blishment would be exchanged for a modest, 
humble dwelling — he loved with sufficient 
truth to feel that happiness with Ethel 
transcended the wealth of the world. It was 
the absolute penury, the debt, the care, that 
haunted him and made such miserable contrast 
with the tens and hundreds of thousands that 
were the subject of discussion on the present 
occasion. His resolution not to entangle Ethel 
in this wilderness of ills, gained strength by 
every chance word that fell from the lips of 
those around him ; and the image, before so 
vivid, of her home at Richmond, wliich he 



LODORE. 155 

might at each hour enter, of her dear face, 
which at any minute might again bless his sight, 
faded into a far-off vision of paradise, from 
which he was banished for ever. 

For a time he persevered in his purpose, if 
not with ease, yet with less of struggle than he 
himself anticipated. That he could at any 
hour break the self-enacted law, and behold 
Ethel, enabled him day after day to continue 
to obey it, and to submit to the decree of banish- 
ment he had passed upon himself. He loved 
his pretty cousins, and their kindness and 
friendship soothed him ; he spent his days 
with them, and the familiar, sisterly inter- 
course, hallowed by long association, and made 
tender by the grace and sweetness of these 
good girls, compensated somewhat for the ab- 
sence of deeper interest. They talked of 
Horatio also, and that was a more touching 
string than all. The almost worship, joined to 
pity and fear for him, with which Edward re- 
garded his cousin, made him cling fondly to 



156 LODORE. 

those so closely related to him, and who sym- 
pathized with, and shared, his enthusiastic 
affection. 

This state of half indifference did not last 
long. His meeting with Ethel in Hyde Park 
operated an entire change. He had seen her 
face but a moment — her dear face, animated 
with pleasure at beholding him, and adorned 
with more than her usual loveliness. He hur- 
ried away, but the image still pursued him. 
All at once the world around grew dark and 
blank ; at every instant his heart asked for 
Ethel. He thirsted for the sweet delight of 
gazing on her soft lustrous eyes, touching her 
hand, listening to her voice, whose tones were 
so familiar'and beloved. He avoided his cou- 
sins to hide his regrets; he sought solitude, 
to commune with memory ; and the intense 
desire kindled within him to return to her, 
was all but irresistible. He had received a 
letter from Horace Saville entreating him to 
join him at Naples ; he had contemplated 



LODORE. 157 

complying, as a means of obtaining forget- 
fulness. Should he not, on the contrary, 
make this visit with Ethel for his companion ? 
It was a picture of happiness most enticing; 
and then he recollected with a pang, that it was 
impossible for him to quit England ; that it 
was only by being on the spot, that he obtained 
the supplies necessary for his existence. With 
bitterness of spirit he recognized once again his 
state of beggary, and the hopelessness that at- 
tended on all his wishes. 

All at once he was surprised by a message 
from his father, through Lord Maristow. He 
was told of Colonel Villiers's intended marriage 
with the only daughter of a wealthy commoner, 
which yet could not be arranged without the 
concurrence of Edward, or rather without sacri- 
fices on his part for the making of settlements. 
The entire payment of his debts, and the pro- 
mise of fifteen hundred a year for the future, 
were the bribes offered to induce him to consent. 
Edward at once notified his compliance. He 
saw the hour of freedom at hand, and the pre- 



158 LODORE. 

sent was too full of interest, too pregnant with 
misery or happiness, to allow the injury done to 
his future prospects to weigh with him for a 
moment. Thus he might purchase his union 
with Ethel— claim her for his own. With the 
thought, a whole tide of tenderness and joy 
poured quick and warm into his heart, and it 
seemed as if he had never loved so devotedly as 
now. How false an illusion had blinded him I 
he fancied that he had banished hope, while in- 
deed his soul was wedded to her image, and 
the very struggle to free himself, had served to 
make the thought of her more peremptory and 
indelible. 

With these thoughts, he again presented him- 
self at Richmond. He asked Mrs. Fitzhenry's 
consent to address her niece, and became the ac- 
cepted lover of Ethel. The meeting of their two 
young hearts in the security of an avowed attach- 
ment, after so many hours wasted in despondency 
and painful struggles, did not visit the fair girl 
with emotions of burning transport : she felt it 
rather like a return to a natural state of things, 



LODORE. 159 

after unnatural deprivation. As if, a young nest- 
ling, she had been driven from her mother's side, 
and was now restored to the dear fosterage of her 
care. She delivered herself up to a calm reli- 
ance upon the future, and saw in the interweav- 
ing of duty and affection, the fulfilment of her 
destiny, and the confirmation of her earthly 
happiness. They were to be joined never to 
part more ! While each breathed the breath of 
life, no power could sever them ; health or sick- 
ness, prosperity or adversity — these became 
mere words ; her health and her riches were 
garnered in his heart, and while she bestowed 
the treasures of her affection upon him, could he 
be poor ? It was not therefore to be her odious 
part to crush the first and single attachment of 
her soul — to tear at once the *' painted veil of 
life," delivering herself up to cheerless reali- 
ties — to know that, to do right, she must banish 
from her recollection those inward-spoken vows 
which she should deem herself of a base incon- 
stant disposition ever to forget. It was not re- 



160 LODORE. 

served for her to pass joyless years of solitude, 
reconciling herself to the necessity of divorcing 
her dearest thoughts from their wedded image. 
The serene and fair-showing home she coveted 
was open before her — she might pass within its 
threshold, and listen to the closing of the doors 
behind, as they shut out the world from her, 
with pure and unalloyed delight. 

Ethel was very young, yet in youth such feel- 
ings are warmer in our hearts than in after 
years. We do not know then that we can ever 
change ; or that, snake-like, casting the skin of 
an old, care-worn habit, a new one will come 
fresh and bright in seeming, as the one before 
had been, at the hour of its birth. We fancy 
then, that if our present and first hope is dis- 
appointed, our lives are a mere blank, not worth 
a " pin's fee ;*" the singleness of our hearts has 
not been split into the million hair-like dif- 
ferences, which, woven by time into one tex- 
ture, clothes us in prudence as with a gar- 
ment. We are as if exposed naked to the ac- 



LODORE. 161 

tion of passions and events, and receive their in- 
fluence with keen and fearful sensitiveness. 
Ethel scarcely heard, and did not listen to 
nor understand, the change of circumstances 
that brought Villiers back to her — she only 
knew, that he was confirmed her own. Satisfied 
with this delightful conclusion to her sufferings, 
she placed her destiny in his hands, without fear 
or question. 

Mrs. Elizabeth thought her niece very young 
to marry ; but Villiers, who had, while hesi- 
tating, done his best to hide his sweet Ethel 
away from every inquisitive eye, now that she 
was to be his own, hastened to introduce 
Lord Maristow (Lady Maristow had died two 
years before) to her, and to bring her among 
his cousins, whom he regarded as sisters. The 
change was complete and overwhelming to the 
fair recluses. Where before they lived in per- 
petual tete-a-tete, or separated but to be alone, 
they were now plunged into what appeared to 
them a crowd. Sophia, Harriet, and Lucy Sa- 



162 LODORE. 

ville, were high-born, high-bred, and elegant 
girls, accustomed to what they called the quiet 
of domestic life, amidst a thousand relations and 
ten thousand acquaintances. No female rela- 
tive had stepped into their mother's place, and 
they were peculiarly independent and high- 
spirited ; they had always lived in what they 
called the world, and knew nothing but what 
that world contained. Their manners were 
easy, their tempers equable and affectionate. If 
their dispositions were not all exactly alike, 
they had a family resemblance that drew them 
habitually near each other. They received 
Ethel among their number with cordiality, be- 
stowing on her every attention which politeness 
and kindness dictated. Yet Ethel felt somewhat 
as a wild antelope among tame ones. Their lan- 
guage, the topics of their discourse, their very 
occupations, were all new to her. She lent her- 
self to their customs with smiles and sweetness, 
but her eye brightened when Edward came, and 
she often unconsciously retreated to his side 



LODORE. 163 

as a shelter and a refuge. Edward's avoca- 
tions had been as worldly perhaps as those 
of his pretty cousins ; but a man is more 
thrown upon the reality of life, while girls 
live altogether in a factitious state. He had 
travelled much, and seen all sorts of people. 
Besides, between him and Ethel, there was that 
mute language which will make those of oppo- 
site sexes intelligible to one another, even when 
literally not understanding each other's dialect. 
Villiers found no deficiency of intelligence or 
sympathy in Ethel, while the fashionable girls 
to whom he had introduced her felt a little at 
a loss how to entertain the stranger. 

Lord Maristow and his family had been de- 
tained in town till after Mr. Saville's marriage, 
and were now very eager to leave it. They re- 
mained out of compliment to Edward, and 
looked forward impatiently to his wedding as 
the event that would set them free. London 
was empty, the shooting season had begun ; yet 
still he was delayed by his father. He wished 



164 LODORE. 

to sign the necessary papers, and free himself 
from all business, that he and his bride might 
immediately join Horatio at Naples. Yet still 
Colonel Villiers's marriage was delayed ; till at 
last he intimated to his son, that it was post- 
poned for the present, and begged that he would 
not remain in England on his account. 

Edward was somewhat staggered by this in- 
telligence. Yet as the letter that communicated 
it contained a considerable remittance, he quiet- 
ed himself. To give up Ethel now was a 
thought that did not for a moment enter his 
mind; it was but the reflection of the difficulties 
that would surround them, if his prospects 
failed, that for a few seconds clouded his brow 
with care. But it was his nature usually to 
hope the best, and to trust to fortune. He had 
never been so prudent as with regard to his 
marriage with Ethel ; but that was for her 
sake. This consideration could not again enter ; 
for, like her, he would, under the near hope of 
making her his, have preferred the wilds of the 



LODORE. 165 

Illinois, with her for his wife, than the position 
of the richest English nobleman, deprived of 
such a companion. His heart, delivered up to 
love, was complete in its devotion and tender- 
ness. He was already wedded to her in soul, 
and would sooner have severed his right arm 
from his body, than voluntarily have divided 
himself from this dearer part of himself. This 
" other half," towards whom he felt as if lite- 
rally he had, to give her being, 

" Lent 
Out of his side to her, nearest his heart ; 
Substantial life, to have her by his side, 
Henceforth an individual solace dear." 

With these feelings, an early day was urged 
and named ; and, drawing near, Ethel was soon 
to become a bride. On first making his offer, 
Villiers had written to Lady Lodore ; and Mrs. 
Fitzhenry, much against her will, by the advice 
of her solicitor, did the same. Lady Lodore 
was in Scotland. No answer came. The j)ro- 
mised day approached ; but still she preserved 



166 LODORE. 

this silence: it became necessary to proceed 
without her consent. Banns were published ; and 
Ethel became the wife of Villiers on the 25th 
of October. Lord Maristow hastened down to 
his Castle to kill pheasants : while, on her part, 
Mrs. Fitzhenry took her solitary way to Long- 
field, half consoled for separating from Ethel, by 
this return to the habits of more than sixty years. 
In vain had London or Richmond wooed her 
stay ; in vain was she pressed to pay a visit to 
Maristow Castle : to return to her home was a 
more enticing prospect. Her good old heart 
danced within her when she first perceived the 
village steeple ; the chimneys of her own house 
made tears spring into her eyes ; and when, in- 
deed, she found herself by the familiar hearth, 
in the accustomed arm-chair, and her attentive 
housekeeper came to ask if she would not take 
any thing after her journey, it seemed to her as 
if all the delights of life were summed up in 
this welcome return to monotony and silence. 



LODORE. 16' 



CHAPTER X. 

Let me 

Awake your love to my uncomforted brother. 

Old Play. 

Meanwhile Villiers and his bride proceeded 
on their way to Naples. It mattered little to 
Ethel whither they were going, or to whom. 
Edward was all in all to her ; and the vehicle 
that bore them along in their journey was a 
complete and perfect world, containing all that 
her heart desired. They avoided large towns, 
and every place where there was any chance 
of meeting an acquaintance. They passed up 
the Rhine, and Ethel often imaged forth, in 
her fancy, a dear home in a secluded nook ; 



168 LODORE. 

and longed to remain there, cut off from the 
world, for ever. She had no thought but for 
her husband, and gratitude to Heaven for the 
happiness showered on her. Her soul might 
have been laid bare, each faculty examined, each 
idea sifted, and one spirit, one sentiment, one 
love, would have been found pervading and 
uniting them all. The heart of a man is seldom 
as single and devoted as that of a woman. In 
the present instance, it was natural that Edward 
should not be so absolutely given up to one 
thought as was his bride. Ethel's affections had 
never been called forth except by her father, 
and by him who was now her husband. ^Vhen 
it has been said, that she thought of heaven to 
hallow and bless her happiness, it must be un- 
derstood that the dead made a part of that hea- 
ven, to which she turned her eyes with such 
sweet thankfulness. She was constant to the 
first affection of her heart. She might be said 
to live perpetually in thought beside her father's 
grave. Before she had wept and sorrowed near 



LODORE. 169 

it ; now she placed the home of her happy mar- 
ried life close to the sacred earth, and fancied 
that its mute inhabitant was the guardian angel 
to watch over and preserve her. 

Villiers had lived among many friends, and 
was warmly attached to several. His cousin 
Horatio was dearer to him than any thing had 
ever been, till he knew Ethel. Even now he 
revered him more, and felt a kind of duteous 
attachment drawing him towards him. He 
wanted Horatio to see and approve of Ethel : — 
not that he doubted what his opinion of her 
would be ; but the delight which his own adora- 
tion of her excellence imparted to him would 
be doubled, when he saw it shared and confirmed 
by his friend. Besides this, he was anxious to 
see Horace on his own account. He wished to 
know whether he was happy in his marriage ; 
whether Clorinda were worthy of him ; and if 
Lady Lodore were entirely forgotten. As they 
advanced on their journey, his desire to see his 
cousin became more and more present to his 

VOL. II. I 



170 LODORE. 

mind ; and he talked of him to Ethel, and im- 
parted to her a portion of his fervent and affec- 
tionate feelings. 

Entering Switzerland, they came into a world 
of snow. Here and there, on the southern side 
of a mountain, a lawny upland might disclose 
itself in summer verdure ; and the brawling 
torrents, increased by the rains, were not yet 
made silent by frost. Edward had visited these 
scenes before; and he could act the guide to 
his enraptured Ethel, who remembered her 
father's glowing descriptions ; and while she 
gazed with breathless admiration, saw his stej) 
among the hills, and thought that his eye had 
rested on the wonders she now beheld. Soon 
the mountains, the sky-seeking *' palaces of na- 
ture," were passed, and they entered fair, jovous 
Italy. At each step they left winter far behind. 
Ethel would willingly have lingered in Florence 
and Rome; but once south of the Appenines, 
Edward was eager to reach Naples ; and the 
letters he got from Saville spurred him on to 
yet greater speed. 



LODOKE. 171 

Before leaving England, Lucy Saville had 
said to Ethel, — " You are now taking our other 
comfort from us ; and what we are to do with- 
out either Horatio or Edward, I am unable to 
conjecture. We shall be like a house without its 
props. Divided, they are not either of them half 
what they were joined. Horace is so prudent, 
so wise, so considerate, so sympathizing ; Ed- 
ward so active and so kind-hearted. In any 
difficulty, we always asked Horace what we 
ought to do; and Edward did the thing which 
he pointed out. 

" Horatio''s marriage was a sad blow to us 
all. You will bring Edward back, and we shall 
be the happier for your being with him ; but 
shall we ever see our brother again ? — or shall 
we only see him to lament the change ? Not 
that he can ever really alter; his heart, his 
understanding, his goodness, are as firm as rock ; 
but there is that about him which makes him 
too much the slave of those he is in immediate 
contact with. He abhors strife ; the slightest 

i2 



172 LODORE. 

disunion is mortal to him. He is not of this 
world. Pure-minded as a woman, honourable 
as a knight of old, he is more like a being we 
read of, and his match is not to be found upon 
earth. Horatio never loved but once, and his 
attachment was unfortunate. He loved Lady 

"' Here recollection dyed Miss Saville'^s 

cheeks with crimson: she had forgotten that 
Lady Lodore was the mother of Ethel. After a 
moment's hesitation she continued: — " I have no 
right to betray the secrets of others. Horace 
was a discarded lover ; and he was forced to 
despise the lady whom he had imagined possessed 
of every excellence. For the first time he was 
absorbed in what may be termed a selfish senti- 
ment. He could not bear to see any of us : he 
fled even from Edward, and wandering away, 
we heard at last that he was at Naples, whither 
he had gone quite unconscious of the spot of 
earth to which he was bending his steps. The 
first letter we got from him was dated from that 
place. His letter was to me ; for I am his 



LODORE. 173 

favourite sister ; and God knows my devoted 
affection, my worship of him, deserves this pre- 
ference. You shall read it ; it is the most per- 
fect specimen of enthusiastic and heart-moving 
eloquence ever penned. He had been as in a 
trance, and awoke again to life as he looked 
down from Pausilippo on the Bay of Naples. 
The attachment to one earthly object, which 
preyed on his being, was suddenly merged in 
one universal love and adoration. He saw that 
the "creation was good ;"" he purged his heart 
at once of the black spot which had blotted and 
marred its beauty ; and opened his whole soul 
to pure, elevated, heavenly love. I tamely 
quote his burning and transparent expressions, 
through which you may discern, as in a glass, 
the glorious excellence of his soul. 

" But, alas ! this state of holy excitement 
could not endure ; something human will still 
creep in to mingle with and sully our noblest 
aspirations. Horatio was taken by an acquaint- 
ance to see a beautiful girl at a convent; in a 



174 LODORE. 

fatal moment an English lady said to him, 
' Come, and I will show you what perfect 
beauty is f and those words decided my poor 
brother's destiny. Of course I only know our 
new sister through his letters. He told us that 
Clorinda was shut up in this convent through 
the heartless vanity of her mother, who dreaded 
her as a rival, to wait there till her parents 
should find some suitable match, which she 
must instantly accept, or be doomed to seclu- 
sion for ever. In his younger days Horace 
had said, ' I am in love with an idea, and 
therefore women have no power over me.' But 
the time came when his heart was to be the dupe 
of his imagination — so was it with his first love 
— so now, I fear, did he deceive himself with 
regard to Clorinda. He declared indeed that 
his love for her was not an absorbing passion 
like his first, but a mingling of pity, admira- 
tion, and that tenderness which his warm heart 
was ever ready to bestow. He described her as 
full of genius and sensibility, a creature of fire 



LODORE. 175 

and power, but dimmed by sorrow, and strug- 
gling with her chains. He visited her again ; 
he tried to comfort, he offered to serve her. It 
was the first time that a manly, generous spirit 
had ever presented itself to the desponding girl. 
Tiie high-souled Englishman appeared as a 
god beside her sordid countrymen ; indeed, 
Horatio would have seemed such compared with 
any of his sex; his fascination is irresistible 
— Cloriiida felt it ; she loved him with Italian 
fervour, and the rirst word of kindness from 
him elicited a whole torrent of gratitude and 
passion. Horace had no wish to marry ; his 
old wound was by no means healed, but rather 
opened, and bled afresh, when he was called 
upon to answer the enthusiastic ardour of the 
Italian girl. He felt at once the difference of 
his feeling for her, and the engrossing sentiment 
of which he had been nearly the victim. But he 
could rescue her from an unworthy fate, and 
make her happ}'. He acted with his usual de- 
termination and precipitancy, and witliin a 



176 LODORE. 

month she became his wife. Here ends my 
story ; his letters were more concise after his 
marriage. At first I attributed this to his 
having a new and dearer friend, but latterly 
when he has written he has spoken w^th such 

yearning fondness for home, that I fear 

And then when I offered to visit him, he nega- 
tived my proposition. How unlike Horatio ! it 
can only mean that his wife was averse to my 
coming. I have questioned slightly any travel- 
lers from Italy. Mrs. Saville seldom appears 
in English society except at balls, and then she 
is always surrounded by Italians. She is de- 
cidedly correct in her conduct, but more I can- 
not tell. Her letters to us are beautifully 
written, and of her talents, even her genius, I 
do not entertain a doubt. Perhaps I am pre- 
judiced, but I fear a Neapolitan, or rather, 
I should say, I fear a convent education ; and 
that taste which leads her to associate with her 
own demonstrative, unrefined countrymen, in- 
stead of trying to link lierself to her husband's 



LODORE. 177 

friends. I may be wrong — I shall be glad to 
be found so. Will you tell me whether I am r 
I rather ask you than Edward, because your 
feminine eyes will discern the truth of these 
things quicker than he. Happy girl ! you are 
going to see Horatio — to find a new, gifted, 
fond friend ; one as superior to his fellow-crea- 
tures, as perfection is superior to frailty .""' 

This account, remembered with more interest 
now that she approached the subject of it, ex- 
cited Ethel's curiosity, and she began, as they 
went on their way from Rome to Naples, in a 
great degree to participate in Edward's eager- 
ness to see his cousin. 



1 5 



178 LODORE. 



CHAPTER XI. 

Sad and troubled ? 
How brave her anger shows ! How it sets off 
Her natural beauty ! Under what happy star 
Was Virolet born, to be beloved and sought 
By two incomparable women ? 

Fletcher. 

It was the month of December when the travel- 
lers arrived at this " piece of heaven dropt upon 
earth,"" as the natives themselves name it. The 
moon hung a glowing orb in the heavens, and 
lighted up the sea to beauty. A blood-red flash 
shot up now and then from Vesuvius ; a summer 
softness was in tlie atmosphere, while a thousand 
tokens presented themselves of a climate more 
friendly, more joyous, and more redundant 
than that of the northern Isle from which they 



LODORE. 179 

came. It was very late at night when they 
reached their hotel, and they were heartily 
fatigued, so that it was not till the next morn- 
ing, that immediately after breakfast, Villiers 
left Ethel, and went out to seek the abode of 
his cousin. 

He had been gone some little time, when a 
waiter of the hotel, throwing open Ethel's 
drawing-room door, announced '' Signor Ora- 
zio." Quite new to Italy, Ethel was ignorant 
of the custom in that country, of designating 
people by their christian names ; and that Ho- 
ratio Saville, being a resident in Naples, and 
married to a Neapolitan, was known everywhere 
by the appellation which the servant now used. 
Ethel was not in the least aware that it was 
Lucy's brother who presented himself to lier. 
She saw a gentleman, tall, very slight in person, 
with a face denoting habitual though tfulness, and 
stamped by an individuality which she could 
not tell whether to think plain, and yet it was 
certainly open and kind. An appearance of 
extreme shyness, almost amounting to awkward- 



180 LODORE. 

ness, was diffused over him, and his words came 
hesitatingly ; he spoke English, and was an 
Englishman— so much Ethel discovered by his 
first words, which were, " Villiers is not at 
home?"'"' and then he began to ask her about 
her journey, and how she liked the view of 
the bay of Naples, which she beheld from 
her windows. They were in this kind of 
trivial conversation when Edward came bound- 
ing up-stairs, and with exclamations of delight 
greeted his cousin. Ethel, infinitely surprised, 
examined her guest with more care. In a 
few minutes she began to wonder how she 
came to think him plain. His deep-set, dark- 
grey eyes struck her as expressive, if not 
handsome. His features were delicately mould- 
ed, and his fine forehead betokened depth of 
intellect ; but the charm of liis face was a 
kind of fitful, beamy, inconstant smile, which 
diffused incomparable sweetness over his phy- 
siognomy. His usual look was cold and ab- 
stracted — his eye speculated with an inward 
though tfulness — a chilling seriousness sat on his 



LODORE. 181 

features, but this glancing and varying half- 
smile came to dispel gloom, and to invite and 
please those with whom he conversed. His 
voice was modulated by feeling, his language 
was fluent, graceful in its turns of expres- 
sion, and original in the thoughts which it 
expressed. His manners were marked by high 
breeding, yet they were peculiar. They were 
formed by his individual disposition, and under 
the dominion of sensibility. Hence they were 
often abrupt and reserved. He forgot the world 
around him, and gave token, by absence of 
mind, of the absorbing nature of his contempla- 
tions. But at a touch this vanished, and a sweet 
earnestness, and a beaming kindliness of spirit, 
at once displaced his abstraction, rendering him 
attentive, cordial, and gay. 

Never had Horatio Saville appeared to so lit- 
tle advantage as during his short tete-a-tete with 
his new relative. At all times, when quiescent, 
he had a retiring manner, and an appearance, 
whose want of pretension did not at first allure, 



182 LODORE. 

and yet which afterwards formed his greatest ,^ 
attraction. He was always unembarrassed, and 
Ethel could not guess that towards her alone he 
felt as timid and shy as a girl. It was witJi 
considerable effect that Horatio had commanded 
himself to appear before tlie daughter of Lady 
Lodore. There was something incongruous and 
inconceivable in the idea of the child of Cor- 
nelia a woman, married to his cousin. He 
feared to see in her an image of the being who 
had subdued his heart of hearts, and laid pros- 
trate his whole soul ; he trembled to catch the 
sound of her voice, lest it might echo tones 
which could disturb to their depths his inmost 
thoughts. Ethel was so unlike her mother, 
that by degrees he became reassured ; her eyes, 
her hair, her stature, and tall slender shape, 
were the reverse of Lady Lodore ; so tliat in a 
little while he ventured to raise his eyes to her 
face, and to listen to her, without being ])re- 
occupied by a painful sensation, which, in its 
violence, resembled terror. It is true that by 



LODORE. 183 

degrees this dissimilarity to her mother became 
less ; she had gestures, smiles, and tones, that 
were all Lady Lodore, and which, when dis- 
cerned, struck his heart with a pang, stealing 
away his voice, and causing him to stand sus- 
pended in the act he was about, like one acted 
upon by magic. 

While this mute and curious examination was 
going on in the minds of Ethel and her visi- 
tant, the conversation had not tarried. Edward 
had never been so far south, and the wonders 
of Naples were as nevv to him as to Ethel. 
Saville was eager to show them, and proposed 
going that very day to Pompeii. For, as he 
said, all their winter was not like the present day, 
so that it was best to seize the genial weather 
while it lasted. Was Mrs. Villiers too much 
fatigued ? On the contrary, Ethel was quite on 
the alert ; but first she asked whether Mrs. 
Saville would not accompany them. 

*' Clorjnda," said Horatio, " promises herself 
much pleasure from your acquaintance, and in- 
tends calling on you to-day at twcjity-four 



184 LODORE. 

o''clock, that is, at the Ave Maria : how stupid I 
am,'' he continued, laughing, " I quite forget that 
you are not Italianized, as I am, and do not know 
the way in which the people here count their 
time. Clorinda will call late in the afternoon, 
the usual visiting hour at Naples, but she would 
find no pleasure in visiting a ruined city and 
fallen fragments. One house in the Chiaja is 
worth fifty Pompeiis in the eyes of a Neapoli- 
tan, and Clorinda is one, heart and soul. I 
hope you will be pleased with her, for she is 
an admirable specimen of her countrywomen, 
and they are wonderful and often sublime crea- 
tures in their way ; but do not mistake her for 
an English woman, or you will be disappointed 
— she has not one atom of body, one particle of 
mind, that bears the least affinity to England. 
And now, is your carriage ordered ? — there it is 
at the door ; so, as I should say to one of my 
own dear sisters, put on your bonnet, Ethel, 
quickly, and do not keep us waiting ; for 
though at Naples, days are short in December, 
and we have none of their light to lose." 



LODORE. 185 

When, after this explanation, Ethel first saw 
Clorinda, she was inclined to think that Saville 
had scarcely done his wife justice. Certainly 
she was entirely Italian, but she was very beau- 
tiful ; her complexion was delicate, though dark 
and without much colour. Her hair silken and 
glossy as the raven\s wing; her large bright 
black eyes resplendent ; the perfect arch of 
her brows, and the marmoreal and harmonious 
grace of her forehead, such as is never seen in 
northern lands, except in sculpture imitated 
from the Greeks. The lower part of her face 
was not so good ; her smile was deficient in 
sweetness, her voice wanted melody, and sound- 
ed loud to an English ear. Her gestures were 
expressive, but quick and wanting in grace. 
She was more agreeable when silent and could 
be regarded as a picture, than when called into 
action. She was complimentary in her con- 
versation, and her manners were winning by 
their frankness and ease. She gesticulated too 
much, and her features were too much in mo- 



186 LODORE. 

tion, — too pan torn imely expressive, so to speak, 
not to impress disagreeably one accustomed to 
the composure of the English. Still she was a 
beautiful creature; young, artless, desirous to 
please, and endowed, moreover, with the viva- 
cious genius, the imaginative talent of her 
country. She spoke as if she were passionately 
attached to her husband ; but when Ethel men- 
tioned his English home and his relations, a 
cloud came over the lovely Neapolitan's counte- 
nance, and a tremor shook her frame. " Do 
not think hardly of me,""* she said, " I do not 
hate England, but I fear it. I am sure I should 
be disliked there — I should be censured, per- 
haps taunted, for a thousand habits and feelings 
as natural to me as the air I breathe. I am 
proud, and I should retort impertinence, ami, 
displeasing my husband, become miserable be- 
yond words. Stay with us; you I love, and 
should be wretched to part from. Stay and 
enjoy this paradise with us. Intreat his sisters, 
if they wish to see Horatio, to come over. I 



LODORE. 187 

will be more than a sister to them ; but let us 
all forget that such a place as that cold, distant 
England exists." 

This was Clorinda's usual mode of speaking 
of her husband's native country : but once, 
when Ethel had urged her going there with 
more earnestness than usual, suddenly her 
countenance became disturbed ; and with a 
lowering and stormy expression of face, that her 
English friend could never afterwards forget, 
she said, " Say not another word, I pray. 
Horatio loved — he loves an Englishwoman — it 
is torture enough for me to know this. I would 
rather be torn in quarters by wild horses, 
broken in pieces on the rack, than set foot in 
England. My cousin, as you have pity for me, 
and value the life of Horace, use your influence 
to prevent his only dreaming of a return to 
England. Methinks I could strike him dead, 
if I only knew that such a thought lived for a 
second in his heart." 

These words said, Clorinda resumed her 



188 LODORE. 

smiles, and was, more than usual, desirous of 
flattering and pleasing Ethel ; so that she soft- 
ened, though she could not erase, the impression 
her vehemence had made. However, there ap- 
peared no necessity for Ethel to exert her influ- 
ence. Horace was equally averse to going to 
England. He loved to talk of it ; he remem- 
bered, with yearning fondness, its verdant 
beauty, its pretty villages, its meandering 
streams, its embowered groves ; the spots he had 
inhabited, the trivial incidents of his daily life, 
were recalled with affection : but he did not 
wish to return. Villiers attributed this some- 
what to his unforgotten attachment to Lady 
Lodore ; but it was more strange that he nega- 
tived the idea of one of his sisters visiting him : 
— " She would not like it," was all the explana- 
tion he gave. 

Several months passed lightly over tlie lieads 
of tlie nc'w-niarried pair ; while they, bee-like, 
sipped the honey of life, and, never cloyed, fed 
perpetually on sweets. Naples, its galleries, its 



LODORE. 189 

classic and beautiful environs, offered an endless 
succession of occupation and amusement. The 
presence of Saville elevated their pleasures ; for 
he added the living spirit of poetry to their sen- 
sations, and associated the treasures of human 
genius with the sublime beauty of nature. He 
had a tact, a delicacy, a kind of electric sym- 
pathy in his disposition, that endeared him to 
every one that approached him. His very sin- 
gularities, by keeping alive an interest in him, 
added to the charm. Sometimes he was so ab- 
stracted as to do the most absent things in the 
world ; and the quick alternations of his gaiety 
and seriousness were often ludicrous from their 
excess. There was one thing, indeed, to which 
Ethel found it difficult to accustom herself, 
which was his want of punctuality, which often 
caused hours to be lost, and their excursions 
spoiled. Nor did he ever furnish good excuses, 
but seemed annoyed at being questioned on the 
subject. 

Clorinda never joined them in their drives and 



190 LODORE. 

rides out of the city. She feared to trust her- 
self to winds and waves ; the heat, the breeze, 
the dust, annoyed her ; and she found no plea- 
sure in looking at mountains, which, after all, 
were only mountains ; or ruins, which were only 
ruins — stones, fit for nothing but to be removed 
and thrown away. But Clorinda had an empire 
of her own, to which she gladly admitted her 
English relatives, and the delights of which they 
fully appreciated. Music, heard in such per- 
fection at the glory of Naples, the theatre of San 
Carlo, and the heavenly strains which filled 
the churches with an atmosphere of sound more 
entrancing than incense — all these were hers ; 
and her own voice, rich, full, and well-cultivated, 
made a temple of melody of her own home. 

There was — it could not be called a wall — 
but there was certainly a paling, of separation 
between Ethel and Clorinda. The young 
Enolish girl could not discover in what it con- 
sisted, or why she could not pass beyond. The 
more she saw of tlie Neapolitan, the more slio 



T-ODORE. 191 

believed that she liked her— certainly her ad- 
miration increased ; — still she felt that on the 
first day that Clorinda had visited her, with her 
caressing manners and well-turned flatteries, 
she was quite as intimate with her as now, after 
several weeks. She had surely nothing to con- 
ceal ; all was open in her conduct : yet often 
Ethel thought of her as a magician guarding a 
secret treasure. Something there was that she 
watched over and hid. There was often a look 
of anxiety about her which Ethel unconsciously 
dispelled by some chance word ; or a cloud all 
at once dimmed her face, and her magnificent 
and dazzling eyes flashed sudden fire, without 
apparent cause. There was something in her 
manner that always said, " You are English, I 
am Italian ; and there is natural war between 
my fire and your snow."" But no word, no act, 
ever betrayed alienation of feeling. Thus a sort 
of mystery pervaded their intercourse, which, 
though it might excite curiosity, and was not un- 
akin to admiration, kept the affections in check 



192 LODORE. 

Sometimes Ethel thought that Clorinda feared 
to compromise her salvation, for she was a Ca- 
tholic. During the revelries of the Carnival, 
this difference of religion was not so apparent ; 
but when Lent began, it showed itself, and 
divided them, on various occasions, more than 
before. At last, Lent also was drawing to a 
close ; and as Villiers and Ethel were anxious 
to see the ceremonies of Passion Week at Rome, 
it was arranged that they, and Mr. and Mrs. 
Saville, should visit the Eternal City together. 
Horatio manifested a distaste even to the short 
residence that it was agreed they should 
make together during the month they were to 
spend at Rome ; but Clorinda showed herself 
particularly anxious for the fulfilment of this 
plan, and, the majority prevailing, the wliole 
party left Naples together. 

Full soon was the veil of mystery then with- 
drawn, and Villiers and his wife let into the 
arcana of tlieir cousin's life. Horatio had yielded 
unwillingly to Clorinda's intreaties, and ex- 



LODORE. 193 

tracted many promises from her before he gave 
his consent ; but all would not do — the natural, 
the uncontrollable violence of her disposition 
broke down every barrier ; and in spite of his 
caution, and her struggles with herself, the 
reality opened fearfully upon the English pair. 
The lava torrent of Neapolitan blood flowed in 
her veins ; and restraining it for some time, it 
at last poured itself forth with volcanic violence. 
It was at the inn at Terracina, on their way to 
Rome, that a scene took place, such as an 
English person must cross Alps and Apennines 
to behold. Ethel had seen that something was 
wrong. She saw the beauty of Clorinda vanished, 
changed, melted away and awfully transformed 
into actual ugliness : she saw tiger like glances 
from her eyes, and her lips pale and quivering. 
Poor Saville strove, witli gentle words, to allay 
the storm to which some jealous freak gave rise : 
perceiving that his endeavours were vain, he rose 
to quit the room. They were at dinner : she 
sprung on him with a knife in her hand : Ed- V 

VOL. II. K 



194 LODORE. 

ward seized her arm ; and she sunk on the floor in 
convulsions. Ethel was scarcely less moved. 
Seeing her terrified beyond all expression, Ho- 
ratio led her from the room. He was pale— his 
voice failed him. He left her ; and sending Ed- 
ward to her, returned to his wife. 

The same evening he said to Villiers, — " Do 
not ask me to stay ;— let me go without another 
word. You see how it is. With what Her- 
culean labour I have concealed this sad truth so 
long, is scarcely conceivable. When Ethels 
sweet smile has sometimes reproached my tar- 
diness, I have escaped, but half alive, from a 
scene like the one you witnessed. 

" In a few hours, it is true, Clorinda will be 
shocked — full of remorse— at my feet ; — that is 
worse still. Her repentance is as violent as her 
rage ; and both transform her from a woman 
into something too painful to dwell upon. She 
is generous, virtuous, full of power and talent ; 
but this fatal vehemence more than neutralizes 
her good qualities. I can do nothing ; I am 



LODORE. 195 

chained to the oar. I have but one hope : time, 
reason, and steadiness of conduct on my part, 
may subdue her ; and as she will at no distant 
period become a mother, softer feelings may 
develop themselves. Sometimes I am violently 
impelled to fly from her for ever. But she 
loves me, and I will not desert her. If she will 
permit me, I will do my duty to the end. Let 
us go back now. You will return to Naples 
next winter ; and with this separation, which 
will gall her proud spirit to its core, as a lesson, 
I hope by that time that she will prove more 
worthy of Ethel's society." 

Nothing could be said to this. Saville, though 
he asked, " Let us go back," had decreed, 
irrevocably, in his own mind, not to advance 
another step with his companions. The parting 
was melancholy and ominous. He would not 
permit Clorinda to appear again ; for, as he 
said, he feared her repentance more than her 
violence, and would not expose Ethel as the 
witness of a scene of humiliation and shame. 

k2 



196 LCD ORE. 

A thousand times over, his friends promised to 
return immediately to Naples, not deferring 
their visit till the following winter. He was to 
take a house for them, for the summer, at Castel 
H Mare, or Sorrento ; and* immediately after 
Easter they were to return. These kind pro- 
mises were a balm to his disturbed mind. He 
watched their carriage from the inn at Terra- 
cina, as it skimmed along the level road of the 
Pontine Marshes, and could not despair while 
he expected its quick return. Turning his eyes 
away, he resumed his yoke again ; and, melan- 
choly beyond his wont, joined his remorseful 
wife. They were soon on their way back to 
Naples:— she less demonstrative in her repent- 
ance, because more internally and deeplv 
touched, than she had ever been before. 



LODORE, 19T 



CHAPTER XII. 

Shall I compare thee to a summer's day ? 
Thou art more lovely and more temperate ; 
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,, 
And summer's lease hath all too short a date; 
But thy eternal summer shall not fade. 

Shakspeare. 

Parting thus sadly from their unfortunate cou- 
sin, Villiers and Ethel were drawn together yet 
nearer, and, if possible, with a deeper tenderness 
of affection than before. Here was an example 
before their eyes, that all their fellow-creatures 
were not equally fortunate in the lottery of life, 
and that worse than a blank befell many, while 
the ticket which they had drawn was a prize be- 



198 LODORE. 

yond all summing. Edward felt indeed disap- 
pointed at losing bis cousin's society, as well as 
deeply grieved at the wretched fate which he 
had selected for himself. Ethel, on the con- 
trary, was in her heart glad that he was absent. 
She bad no place in that heart to spare away 
from her husband ; and however much she liked 
Horatio, and worthy as he was of her friendship, 
she felt him as an encroacher. Now she deli- 
vered herself up to Edward, and to the thought 
of Edward solely, with fresh and genuine 
delight. No one stood between her and him — 
none called off his attention, or forced her to 
pass one second of time unoccupied by his idea. 
When she expressed these feelings to Villiers, 
he called her selfish and narrow-hearted, yet his 
pride and his affection were gratified ; for he 
knew how true was every word she uttered, and 
how without flaw or blot was her faith and her 
attachment. 

" And yet, my Ethel," he said, " I some- 
times ask myself^ how this boasted affection of 



LODORE. 199 

yours will stand the trials which I fear are pre- 
paring for it/' 

'' What trials?" she asked anxiously. 

" Care, poverty ; the want of all the luxuries, 
perhaps of the comforts of life." 

Ethel smiled again. '' That is your affair,'" 
she replied, " do you rouse your courage, if you 
look upon these as evils. I shall feel nothing of 
all this, while near you ; care — poverty — want ! 
as if I needed any thing except your love — you 
yourself — who are mine." 

" Yes, dear," replied Villiers, " that is all 
very well at this moment ; rolling along in a 
comfortable carriage — an hotel ready to receive 
us, with all its luxuries ; but suppose us without 
any of these, Ethel — suppose yourself in a me- 
lancholy, little, dingy abode, without servants, 
without carriage, going out on foot." 

" Not alone," replied his wife, laughing, and 
kissing his hand ; " I shall have you to wait 
on me — to wait upon — " 

" You take it very well now," said Edward ; 



200 LODORE, 

" I hope that you will never be put to the trial. I 
am far from anticipating this excess of wretched- 
ness, of course, but I cannot help feeling, that the 
prospects of to-morrow are uncertain, and I am 
anxious for my long-delayed letters from Eng- 
land." 

With Ethel's deep and warm affection, had 
she been ten or only five years older, she also 
must have participated in Edward's inquietude. 
But care is a word, not an emotion, for the 
very young. She was only seventeen. She 
had never attended to the disbursements of 
money — she was ignorant of the mechanism of 
giving and receiving, on which the course of our 
life depends. It was in vain that she sought in 
the interior of her mind for an image that 
should produce fear or regret, with regard to 
the absence or presence of money. No one re- 
flection or association brought into being an 
idea on the subject. Again she kissed Ed- 
ward's hand, and looked on him with her soft 
clear eyes, thinking only, " He is here — and 
Heaven has given me all I ask." 



LODORE. 201 

Left again to themselves, they were anxious 
to avoid acquaintances. Yet this was impos- 
sible during the Holy Week at Rome. Villiers 
found many persons whom he knew ; women of 
high rank and fashion, men of wealth, or with 
the appearance of it, enjoying the present, and, 
while away from England, unencumbered by 
care. Mr. and Mrs. Villiers were among these, 
and of them ; their rank and their style of living 
resembling theirs, associated them together. 
All this was necessary to Edward, for he had 
been accustomed to it — it was natural to Ethel, 
because, being wholly inexperienced, she did as 
others did, and as Villiers wished her to do, 
without reflection or forethought. 

Yet each day added to Edward's careful 
thoughts. Easter was gone, and the period 
approached when they had talked of return- 
ing to Naples. The covey of English had 
taken flight towards the north; they were 
almost the only strangers in the ancient and 
silent city, whose every stone breathes of a 

k5 



202 LODORE. 

world gone by — whose surpassing beauty crowns 
her still the glory of the world. The English 
pair, left to themselves, roamed through the 
ruins and loitered in the galleries, never weary 
of the very ocean of beauty and grandeur which 
they coursed over in their summer bark. The 
weather grew warm, for the month of May had 
commenced, and they took refuge in the vast 
churches from the heat ; at twilight they souglit 
the neighbouring gardens, or scrambled about 
the Coliseum, or the more ruined and weed- 
grown baths of Caracalla. The fire-flies came 
out, and the splashing of the many fountains 
reached their ears from afar, while the clear 
azure of the Roman sky bent over them in 
beauty and peace. 

Ethfel never alluded to their proposed return 
to Naples — she feared each day to hear Villiers 
mention it — she was so happy where she was, 
she shrunk from any change. The majesty, the 
simplicity, the quiet of Rome, were in unison 
with the holy stillness that dwelt in her soul. 



LODORE. 208 

absorbed as it was by one unchanging image. 
She had reached the summit of human happi- 
ness — she had nothing more to ask ; her full 
heart, not bursting, yet gently overflowing in 
its bliss, thanked Heaven, and drew nearer 
Edward, and was at peace. 

" God help us !" exclaimed Villiers, " I 
wonder what on earth will become of us !" 

They were sitting together on a fragment of 
tlie Coliseum ; they had clambered up its fallen 
wall, and reached a kind of weed-grown chasm 
whose depth, as it was moonlight, they could not 
measure by the eye ; so they sat beside it on a 
small fragment, and Villiers held Ethel close to 
him lest she should fall. The heartfelt and in- 
nocent caress of two united in the sight of Hea- 
ven, wedded together for the endurance of the 
good and ills of life, hallowed the spot and 
hour ; and then, even while Ethel nestled nearer 
to him in fondness, Edward made the exclama- 
tion that she heard with a wonder wliich 



204 LODORE. 

mingled with, yet could not disturb, the calm 
joy which she felt. 

" What but good can come of us, while we 
are thus ?" she asked. 

" You will not listen to me, nor understand 
me," replied her husband. " But I do assure you, 
that our position is more than critical. No re- 
mittances, no letters come from England ; we 
are in debt here — in debt in Italy ! A thousand 
miles from our resources ! I grope in the dark 
and see no outlet — every day's post, with the 
nothing that it brings, adds to my anxiety.'* 

" All will be well," replied Ethel gently ; 
" no real evil will happen to us, be assured." 

" I wish," said Villiers, " your experience, 
instead of your ignorance, suggested the asser- 
tion. I would rather die a thousand deaths 
than apply to dear Horace, who is ill enough 
off himself; but every day Iiere adds to our 
difficulties. Our only hope is in our instant re- 
turn to England — and, by heavens !- you kiss 



LODORE. 205 

me, Ethel, as if we lived in fairy land, and that 
such were our food — have you no fears ?" 

" I am sorry to say, none," she answered in a 
soft voice ; " I wish I could contrive some, be- 
cause I appear unsympathizing to you— but I 
cannot fear ; — you are in health and near me. 
Heaven and my dear father's spirit will watch 
over us, and all will be well. This is the end 
and beginning of my anxiety ; so dismiss yours, 
love— for, believe me, in a day or two, these 
forebodings of yours will be as a dream." 

" It is very strange," replied Edward, " were 
you not so close to me, I should fancy you a 
spirit instead of a woman ; you seem to have no 
touch of earthly solicitude. Well, T will do as 
you bid me, and hope for to-morrow. And now 
let us get down from this place before the moon 
sets and leaves us in darkness." 

As if to confirm the auguries of Ethel, the 
following morning brought the long-expected 
letters. One contained a remittance, another 
was from Colonel Villiers, to say, that Edward's 



206 LODORE. 

immediate presence was requisite in England 
to make the final arrangements before his 
marriage. With a glad heart Villiers turned 
his steps northward ; while Ethel, if she could 
have regretted aught while with him, would 
have sighed to leave their lonely haunts in 
Rome. She well knew that whatever of sublime 
nature might display, or man might congregate 
of beautiful in art elsewhere, there was a calm 
majesty, a silent and awful repose in the ruins 
of Rome, joined to the delights of a southern 
climate, and the luxuriant vegetation of a sunny 
soil, more in unison with her single and devoted 
heart, than any other spot in the universe could 
boast. They would both have rejoiced to 
have seen Saville again ; yet they were unac- 
knowledgedly glad not to pursue their plan of 
domesticating near him at Naples. A remedi- 
less evil, which is for ever the source of fresh 
disquietude, is one that tasks human forti- 
tude and liuman patience, more than tliose 
vaster misfortunes whicli elevate while tlicy 



LODORE. 207 

wound. The proud aspiring spirit of man 
craves something to raise him from the dust, 
and to adorn his insignificance; he seeks to 
strengthen his alliance with the lofty and the 
eternal, and shrinks from low-born cares, as 
being the fetters and bolts that link him to his 
baser origin. Saville, the slave of a violent 
woman's caprice, struggling with passions, at 
once so fiery and so feeble as to excite contempt, 
was a spectacle which they were glad to shun. 
Their own souls were in perfect harmony, and 
discord was peculiarly abhorrent to them. 

They travelled by the beaten route of Mont 
Cenis, Lyons, and Calais, and in less than a 
month arrived in England. As the presence of 
Villiers was requisite in London, after staying 
a few days at an hotel in Brook-street, they took 
a furnished house in the same street for a short 
time. The London season had passed its zenith, 
but its decline was scarcely perceptible. Etliel 
had no wish to enter into its gaieties, and it had 
been Edward's plan to avoid them until they 



208 LODORE. 

were richer. But here they were, placed by 
fate in the very midst of them ; and as, when 
their affairs were settled, they intended again to 
return abroad, he could not refuse himself the 
pleasure of seeing Ethel, in the first flower of her 
loveliness, mingling with, and outshining, every 
other beauty of her country. It would have 
been difficult indeed, placed within the verge 
of the English aristocracy assembled in London, 
to avoid its engagements and pleasures — for he 
" also was an Arcadian," and made one of the 
self-enthroned " world." The next two months, 
therefore, while still every settlement was de- 
layed by his father, they spent in the fashion- 
able circles of London. 

They did not indeed enter into its amuse- 
ments with the zest and resolution of tyros. 
To Villiers the scene was not new, and there- 
fore not exceedingly enticing ; and Ethel's 
mind was not of the sort to be borne along in 
the stream of folly. They avoided going to 
crowded entertainments — they were always satis- 



LODORE, 209 

fied with one or two parties in the evening. 
Nay, once or twice in the week they usually re- 
mained at home, and not unseldom dined tete- 
a-tete. The serpent^fang of pleasure, and the 
paltry ambition of society, had no power over 
Ethel. She often enjoyed herself, because she 
often met people of either sex, whose fame, or 
wit, or manners, interested and pleased her. 
But as little vanity as mortal woman ever had 
fell to her share. Very young, and (to use 
the phrase of the day) very new, flattery and 
admiration glanced harmlessly by her. Her 
personal vanity was satisfied when Villiers was 
pleased, and, for the rest, she was glad to im- 
prove her mind, and to wear away the timidity, 
which she felt that her lonely education had in- 
duced, by mingling with the best society of her 
country. 

She had also some curiosity, and as she pro- 
mised herself but a brief sojourn in this land of 
lions, she wished to see several things and per- 
sons she might never come in contact with 
again. Various names which had reached her 



210 LODORE. 

in the Illinois, here grew from shadows into 
real human beings— ministers of state, beauties, 
authors, and wits. She visited once or twice 
the ventilator of St. Stephen's, and graced a red 
bench of the House of Lords on the prorogation 
of Parliament. Villiers was very much pleased 
with her throughout. His pride was gratified 
by tlie approval she elicited from all. Men 
admired her, but distantly — as a being they 
could not rudely nor impertinently approach. 
Women were not afraid of her, because they saw, 
that though she made no display of conjugal at- 
tachment, she loved her husband. Her extreme 
youth, the perpetual sunshine of her countenance, 
and the gentle grace of her manners, won more 
the liking than the praise of her associates. They 
drew near her as to one too untaught to under- 
stand their mysteries, and too innocent to judge 
them severely ; an atmosphere of kindness and 
of repose followed her wherever she went : this 
her husband felt more than any other, and he 
prized his Ethel at the worth she so truly de- 
served. 



LODORE. 211 

One of the reasons which caused Mrs. Vil- 
liers to avoid large assemblies, was that Lady 
Lodore was in town, and that in such places 
they sometimes met. Ethel did not well know 
how to act. Youth is ever fearful of making 
unwelcome demonstration, and false shame often 
acts more powerfully to influence it, than the 
call of duty or the voice of affection. Villiers 
had no desire to bring the mother and daughter 
together, and stood neutral. Lady Lodore had 
once or twice recognized her by a bow and a 
smile, but after such, she always vanished and 
was seen no more that evening. Ethel often 
yearned to approach, to claim her tenderness 
and to offer her filial affection. Villiers laughed 
at such flights. " The safe thing to do," he 
said, " is to take the tone of Lady Lodore. She 
is held back by no bashfulness — she does the 
thing she wishes, without hesitation or diffi- 
culty. Did she desire her lovely grown-up 
daughter to play a child's part towards her, she 
would soon contrive to bring it about. Lady 



212 LODORE. 

Lodore is a woman of the world — she was 
nursed in its lessons, and piously adheres to its 
code ; its ways are her's, and the objects of am- 
bition which it holds out, are those which she 
desires to attain. She is talked of as admired 

and followed by the Earl of D . You may 

spoil all, if you put yourself forward." 

Ethel was not quite satisfied. The voice of 
nature was awake within, and she yearned to 
claim her mother's affection. Until now, she had 
regarded her more as a stranger ; but at this 
time, a filial instinct stirred her heart, impelling 
her to some outward act — some demonstration 
of duty. Whenever she saw Lady Lodore, 
which was rarely, and at a distance, she gazed 
earnestly on her, and tried to read within her 
soul, whether Villiers was right, and her mo- 
ther happy. The shining, uniform outside of a 
woman of fashion baffled her endeavours with- 
out convincing her. One evening at the Opera, 
she discerned Lady Lodore in the tier below her. 
Ethel drew back and shaded herself with the cur- 



LODORE. 213 

tain of her box, so that she could not be per- 
ceived, while she watched her mother intently. 
A succession of visitors came into Lady Lo- 
dore's box, and she spoke to all with the anima- 
tion of a heart at ease. There was an almost 
voluptuous repose in her manner and appear- 
ance, that contrasted with, while it adorned, the 
easy flow of her conversation, and the spring- 
tide of wit, which, to judge from the amuse- 
ment of her auditors, flowed from her lips. Yet 
Ethel fancied that her smile was often forced, 
so suddenly did it displace an expression of 
listlessness and languor, which when she turned 
from the people in her box to the stage, came 
across her countenance like a shadow. It might 
be the gas, whicli shadows so unbecomingly the 
fair audience at the King's Theatre ; it might 
be the consequences of raking, for Lady Lodore 
was out every night ; but Ethel thought that 
she saw a change; she was less brilliant, her 
person thinner, and had lost some of its exqui- 
site roundness. Still, as her daughter gazed, 



214 LODORE. 

she thought, She is not happy. Yet what could 
she do ? How pour sweetness into the bitter 
stream of life ? As Villiers had said, any ad- 
vance of hers might spoil all. The sister of the 
nobleman he had mentioned, was her companion 

at the opera. Lord D himself came, 

though late, to fetch her away. She had 
therefore her own prospects, her own plans, 
which doubtless she desired to pursue undis- 
turbed, however they might fail to charm awav 
the burthen of life. 

Once, and only once, Ethel heard her 
mother's voice, and was spoken to by her. 
She had gone to hear the speech from the 
throne, on the prorogation of Parliament. She 
got there late, so that every bench was filled. 
Room was made for her near the throne, imme- 
diately under the gallery, (as the house was 
constructed until last year,) but she was obliged 
to be separated from her party, and sat half 
annoyed at being surrounded by strangers. 
A peer, whom she recognized as the Earl of 



LODORE. 215 

D J came up, and entered into conversation 

with the lady sitting behind her. Could it 
be her mother ? She remembered, that as she 
sat down she had glanced at some one whom she 
thought she knew, and she did not doubt that 
this was Lady Lodore. A sudden thrill passed as 
an electric shock through her frame, every joint 
in her body trembled, her knees knocked together, 
and the colour forsook her cheeks. She tried to 
rally. Why should she feel agitated, as if pos- 
sessed by terror, on account of this near contact 
with the dearest relation Heaven has bestowed 
on its creatures ? Why not turn ; and if she 
did not speak, claim, with beseeching eyes, her 
mother's love ? Was it indeed her ? The lady 
spoke, and her voice entered and stirred Ethel's 
beating heart with strange emotion ; every drop 
of blood within her seemed to leap at the sound ; 
but she sat still as a statue, saying to herself, 

"• When Lord D leaves her I will turn and 

speak." After some trivial conversation on topics 
of the day, the peers were ordered to take 



^ 



216 LODORE. 

their seats, and Lord D departed; — then 

Ethel tried to summon all her courage ; but 
now the doors were thrown open, the king en- 
tered, and every one stood up. At this mo- 
ment, — as she, in the confusion of being called 
upon, while abstracted, to do any act, however 
slight, had for a moment half forgotten her mo- 
ther, — her arm was touched ; and the same 

voice which had replied to Lord D , said to 

her, " Your ear-ring is unfastened, Ethel ; it 
will fall out/' Ethel could not speak ; she 
raised her hands, mechanically, to arrange the 
ornament; but her trembling fingers refused to 
perform the office. " Permit me," said the 
lady, drawing off her glove;" and Ethel felt 
her mother's hand touch her cheek : her very 
life stood suspended ; it was a bitter pain, yet a 
pleasure inconceivable ; there was a suffocation 
in her throat, and the tears filled her eyes; 
but even the simple words, " I thank you," 
died on her lips — her voice could frame no 
sound. The world, and all within its sphere, 



LODORE. 217 

might have passed away at that moment, and 
she been unconscious of any change. "Yes, 
she will love me !""' was the idea that spoke au- 
dibly within; and a feeling of confidence, a flow 
of sympathy and enthusiastic affection, burst 
on her heart. As soon as she could recollect 
herself, she turned* Lady Lodore was no longer 
there; she had glided from her seat; and Ethel 
just caught a glimpse of her, as she contrived 
another for herself, behind a column, which 
afterwards so hid her, that her daughter could 
only see the waving of her plumes. On these 
she fixed her eyes until all was over ; and then 
Lady Lodore went out hurriedly, with averted 
face, as if to escape her recognition. This put 
the seal on EthePs dream. She believed that 
her mother obviously signified her desire that 
they should continue strangers to each other. 
It was hard, but she must submit. She had no 
longer that prejudice against Lady Lodore, that 
exaggerated notion of her demerits, wliich the 

VOL. II. L 



218 LODORE. 

long exile of her father, and the abhorrence 
of Mrs. Fitzhenry, had before instilled. Her 
mother was no longer a semi-gorgon, hid be- 
hind a deceptive mask — a Medea, without 
a touch of human pity. She was a lovely, 
soft-voiced, angelic-looking woman, whom she 
would have given worlds to be permitted to 
love and wait upon. She found excuses for her 
errors ; she lavished admiration on all her at- 
tractions ; she could do all but muster courage 
to vanquish the obstacles that existed to their 
intercourse. She fondly cherished her image, 
as an idol placed in the sanctuary of her heart, 
which she could regard with silent reverence 
and worship, but whose concealing veil she 
could not raise. Villiers smiled when she spoke 
in this way to him. He saw, in her enthusiasm, 
the overflowing of an affectionate heart, which 
longed to exhaust itself in loving. He kissed 
her, and bade her think any thing, so that she 
did nothing. The time for doing had indeed. 



LODOllE. 219 

for the present, passed away. Lady Lodore 
left town ; and when mother and daughter met 
again, it was not destined to be beneath a 
palace roof, surrounded by the nobility of the 
land. 



220 I.OUORK 



CHAPTER XIII. 



I choose to comfort myself by considering, that even 
while I am lamenting my present uneasiness, it is 
passing away. 

Horace Walpole. 



An event occurred at this time, which con- 
siderably altered the plans of ]\Ir. and Mrs. 
Villiers. They had been invited to spend some 
time at Maristow Castle, and were about to 
proceed thither with Lord Maristow and his 
daughters, when the sudden death of Mr. 
Saville changed every thing. He died of a ma- 
lignant fever, leaving a young widow, and no 
child, to inherit his place in society. 



LODORE. 221 

Through this unlooked-for event, Horatio 
became the immediate heir of his father's title. 
He stept, from the slighted position of a younger 
son into the rank of the eldest ; and thus be- 
came another being in all men's eyes — but chiefly 
in his father's. 

Viscount Maristow had deeply regretted his 
son's foreign marriage, and argued against his 
choice of remaining abroad. He was a statesman, 
and conceived that Horatio's talents and elo- 
quence would place him high among the legis- 
lators of St. Stephen's. The soundness of his 
understanding, and the flowing brilliancy of his 
language, were pledges of his success. ButSaville 
was not ambitious. His imagination rose higli 
above the empty honours of the world — to be 
useful was a butter aim ; but he did not con- 
ceive that his was a mind calculated to lead 
others in its train : its framework was too deli- 
cate, too finely strung, to sound in accord with 
the many. He wanted the desire to triumph ; 
and was content to adore truth in the temple of 



522 LODORE. 

bis own mind, without defacing its worship by 
truckling to the many falsehoods and errors 
which demand subserviency in the world. 

Lord Maristow had hitherto submitted to his 
disappointment, not without murmurs, but with- 
out making any great effort at victory. He had 
written many letters intreating his son to cast 
off the drowsy Neapolitan sloth ; — he had be- 
sought Villiers, previous to his departure the 
preceding year, to bring his cousin back with 
him ; — and this was all. 

The death of his eldest son quickened him to 
exertion. He resolved to trust no longer to 
written arguments, but to go himself to Italy. 
and by force of paternal authority, or persua- 
sions, to induce his son to come back to his native 
country, and to fill with lionour the post to 
which fortune had advanced him. He did not 
doubt that Horatio would himself feel the force 
of his new duties ; but it would be clenching 
his purpose, and paying an agreeable compli- 
ment to Clorinda, to make this journey, and to 



LODORE. 223 

bring them back with him when he returned. 
Whatever Mrs. Saville's distaste to EnMand 
might be, it must yield to the necessity that 
now drew her thither. Lord Maristow could 
not imagine any resistance so violent as to im- 
pede his wishes. The projected journey charmed 
his daughters, saddened as they v,ere by their 
recent loss. Lucy was overjoyed at the pros- 
pect of seeing her beloved brother. She felt 
sure that Clorinda would be brought to reason . 
and thus, with their hearts set upon one object, 
one idea, they bade adieu to Ethel and her hus- 
band, as if their career was to be as sunny and 
as prosperous as they doubted not that their 
own would be. 

Lord Maristow alone guessed hov/ things 
might stand. •' Edward, my dear boy,'' he 
said, " give me credit for great anxiety on 
your account. I wish this marriage of yours 
liad not taken place, then you might have 
roughed it as other young men do, and luive 
been the better for a little tart experience. I 



224 LODORE. 

do not like this shuffling on your father's part. 
I hear for a certainty that this marriage of his 
will come to nothing — the friends of the young 
lady are against it, and she is very young, and 
only an heiress by courtesy — her father can 
give her as many tens of thousands as he 
pleases, but he has sworn not to give her a 
shilling if she marries without his consent ; and 
he has forbidden Colonel Villiers his house. He 
still continues at Cheltenham, and assures every 
one that he is on safe ground ; that the girl loves 
him, and that when once his, the father must 
yield. It is too ridiculous to see him playing a 
boy-lover's part at his time of life, trying to un- 
dermine a daughter's sense of duty — he, who may 
soon be a grandfather ! The poor little thing, 
I am told, is quite fascinated by his dashing- 
manners and station in society. We shall see 
how it will end — I fear ill ; her father might 
pardon a runaway match with a lover of her 
own age ; but he will never forgive the cold- 
blooded villany, excuse me, of a man of three 



LODORE. 225 

times her age ; who for gain, and gain only, is 
seeking to steal her from him. Such is the sum 
of what I am told by a friend of mine, just ar- 
rived from Cheltenham. The whole thing is 
the farce of the day, and the stolen interviews 
of the lovers, and the loud, vulgarly-spoken 
denunciations of her father, vary the scene from 
a travestie of Romeo and Juliet to the comedies 
of Plautus or IMoliere. I beg your pardon, 
Edward, for my frankness, but I am angry. I 
have been used as a cat's-paw— I have been 
treated unfairly — I was told that the marriage 
wanted but your signature — my representations 
induced you to offer to Miss Fitzhenry, and 
now you are a ruined man. I am hampered by 
my own family, and cannot come forward to your 
assistance. My advice is, that you wait a little, 
and see what turn matters take ; once decided, 
however they conclude, strong representations 
shall be made to your father, and he shall be 
forced to render proper assistance; then if poli- 

L 5 



226 LODORE. 

tics take a better turn, I may do something for 
you — or you can live abroad till better times." 

Villiers thanked Lord Maristow for his ad- 
vice, and made no remarks either on his details 
or promises. He saw his own fate stretched 
drearily before him ; but his pride made him 
strong to bear without any outward signs of 
wincing. He would suffer all, conceal all, and 
be pitied by none. The thought of Ethel alone 
made him weak. Were she sheltered during 
the storm which he saw gathering so darkly, he 
would have felt satisfied. 

What was to be done ? To go abroad, was 
to encounter beggary and famine. To remain, 
exposed him to a thousand insults and dangers 
from which there was no escape. Such were 
the whisperings of despair — but brighter hopes 
often visited him. All could not be so evil as 
it seemed. Fortune, so long his enemy, would 
yield at last one inch of ground— one inch 
to stand upon, where he might wait in pati- 



LODORE. 227 

ence for better days. Had he indeed done 
his utmost to avert the calamities he appre- 
hended ? Certainly not. Thus spoke his san- 
guine spirit : more could and should be done. 
His father might find means, he himself be en- 
abled to arrange with his lawyer some mode of 
raising a sum of money which would at least 
enable him to go on the continent with his wife. 
He spent his thoughts in wishes for the attain- 
ment of this desirable conclusion to his adver- 
sity, till the very earnestness of his expectations 
seemed to promise their realization. It could 
not be that the worst would come. Absurd ! 
Something must happen to assist them. Seek- 
ing for this unknown something which, in spite 
of all his efforts, would take no visible or tan- 
gible form, he spent weary days and sleepless 
nights, his brain spinning webs of thought, not 
like those of the spider, useful to their weaver — 
a tangled skein they were rather, where the tlue 
was inextricably hid. He did not speak of 
these things to Ethel, but he grew sad, and 



228 LODORE. 

she was anxious to go out of town, to have him 
all to herself, when she promised herself to dis- 
pel his gloom ; and, as she darkly guessed at 
the source of his disquietude, by economy and 
a system of rigid privation, to show him how 
willing and able she was to meet the adversity 
which he so much dreaded. 



LODORE. 229 



CHAPTER XIV. 

The pure, the open, prosperous love. 
That pledged on earth, and sealed above. 
Grows in the world's approvmg eyes. 

In friendship's smile and home's caress. 
Collecting all the heart's sweet ties 

Into one knot of happiness. 

Lalla Rookh. 

Another month v/ithered away in fruitless ex- 
pectation. Villiers felt that he was following 
an ignis fatuus, yet knew not how to give up 
his pursuit. At length, he listened more do- 
cilely to Ethel's representations of the expedi- 
ency of quitting town. She wished to pay her 
long-promised visit to her aunt, and Villiers at 
last consented to accompany her. They gave 
lip their house, dispersed a tolerably numerous 



230 LODORE. 

establishment, and left town for their sober and 
rural seclusion in Essex. 

Taken from the immediate scene where care 
met him at every turn, Edward's spirits rose ; 
and the very tranquillity and remoteness of 
Longfield became a relief and an enjoyment. 
It was bright October weather. The fields were 
green, the hedges yet in verdant trim. The air 
was so still that the dead leaves hung too lazy 
to fall, from the topmost boughs of the earlier 
trees. The oak was still dressed in a dark 
sober green — the fresh July shoot, having lost 
its summer hue, was unapparent among the 
foliage ; the varying tints of beach, ash, and elm, 
diversified the woods. The morning and evening 
skies were resplendent with crimson and gold, and 
the moonlight nio^hts were sweeter than the dav. 

Fatigued by the hurry of town, and one at 
least worn out with care, the young pair took a 
new lease of love in idleness in this lonely spot. 
A slight attack of rheumatism confined Aunt 
Bessy to her chimney-corner, but in spite of her 



LODORE. 231 

Caution to Ethel not to incur the same penalty 
from all the array of wet walks and damp shoes, 
it was her best pleasure each morning to tie 
on her bonnet, take her husband's arm, and 
they wandered away together, returning only to 
find their horses ready, and then they departed 
for hours, coming back late and unwillingly 
after the sun was down. Mrs. Elizabeth won- 
dered where all the beautiful spots were, which 
Ethel described so enthusiastically as to be found 
in the neighbourhood. The good lady longed 
to go out herself to see if she could not reap 
equal delight from viewing the grouping of trees, 
whose various autumnal tints were painted in 
Ethel's speech with hues too bright for earth, 
or to discover what there could be so extraordi- 
narily picturesque in a moss-grown cottage, near 
a brook, with a high bank clothed with wood 
behind, which she believed must be one Dame 
Nixon's cottage, in the Vale of Bevvling, and 
which she knew she must have passed a thou- 
sand times, and yet she had never noticed its 
beauty. Very often Ethel could give no infor- 



232 LODORE. 

mation of whither they had been, only they had 
lost themselves in majestic woods, lingered in 
winding lanes, which led to resplendent views, 
or even reached the margin of the barren 
sea, to behold the enveloping atmosphere re- 
flected in its fitful mirror — to watch the pro- 
gress of evanescent storms, or to see the moon 
light up her silvery pathway on the dusky waste. 
Villiers took his gun with him in his walks, but, 
though American bred, Ethel was so unfeign- 
edly distressed by the sight of death, that he 
never brought down a bird : he shot in its di- 
rection now and then, to keep his pointer in 
practice, and to laugh at his wife's glad triumph 
when he missed his feathery mark. 

Ethel was especially delighted to renew her 
acquaintance with Longfield, her father's bov- 
hood home, under such sunny circumstances. 
She had loved it before : with anguish in her 
heart, and heavy sadness weighing on her steps, 
she had loved it for his sake. But now that it 
became the home, the dedicated garden of love, 
it received additional beauty in her eyes from its 



LODORE. 233 

association with the memory of Lord Lodore. 
All things conjoined ; the season, calmed and 
brightened, as if for her especial enjoyment ; 
remembrance of the past, and the undivided 
possession of her Edward's society, combined 
to steep her soul in happiness. Even he, whose 
more active and masculine spirit might have 
fretted in solitude and sloth, was subdued by 
care and uncertainty to look on the peace of the 
present moment as the dearest gift of the gods. 
Both so young, and the minds of both open as 
day to each other''s eyes, no single blot obscured 
their intercourse. They never tired of each 
other, and the teeming spirit of youth filled the 
empty space of each hour as it came, with a 
new growth of sentiments and ideas. The long 
evening had its pleasures, with its close-drawn 
curtains and cheerful fire. Even whist with the 
white-haired parson, and Mrs. Fitzhenry in her 
spectacles, imparted pleasure. Could any thing 
duller have been devised, which would have 
been difficult, it had not been so to tliem ; and 



234 LODORE. 

a stranger coming in and seeing their animated 
looks, and hearing their cheerful tones and 
light-hearted laugh, must have envied the very 
Elysium of delight, which aunt Bessy's usually 
so sober drawing-room contained. Merely to see 
Ethel leaning on her husband''s arm, and look- 
ing up in his face as he drew her yet closer, 
and, while his fingers were twined among her 
silken ringlets, kissed so fondly her fair brow, 
must have demonstrated to a worldling the irre- 
fragable truth that happiness is bom a twin, 
love being the parent. 

The beauty of a pastoral picture has but 
short duration in this cloudy land, — and happi- 
ness, the sun of our moral existence, is yet 
more fitful in its visitations. Villiers and his 
young wife took their accustomed ride through 
shady lanes and copses, and through parks, 
where, thougli the magnificent features of na- 
ture were wanting, the eye was delighted by a 
various prospect of wood and lawny upland. 
The soft though wild west wind drove along 



LODORE. 235 

vast masses of snowy clouds, which displayed in 
their intervals the deep stainless azure of the 
boundless sky. The shadows of the clouds now 
darkened the pathway of our riders, and now 
they saw the sunlight advance from a distance, 
coming on with steps of light and air, till it 
reached them, and they felt the warmth and 
gladness of sunshine descend on them. The 
various coloured woods were now painted 
brightly in the beams, and now half lost in 
shadow. There was life and action everywhere 
— yet not the awakening activity of spring, but 
rather a vague, uneasy restlessness, allied to 
languor, and pregnant with melancholy. 

Villiers was silent and sad. Ethel too well 
knew the cause wherefore he was dispirited. 
He had received letters that morning which 
stung him into a perception of the bitter realities 
wliich were gathering about them. One was to 
say that no communication had been received 
from his father, but that it was believed that 
he Wcis somewhere in London —the other was 



236 LODORE. 

from his banker, to remind him that he had 
overdrawn his credit — nearly the most disagree- 
able intelligence a man can hear when he pos- 
sesses no immediate means of replenishing his 
drained purse. Ethel was grieved to see him 
pained, but she could not acutely feel these 
pecuniary distresses. She tried to divert his 
thoughts by conversation, and pointing out the 
changes which the advancing season made in the 
aspect of the country. 

" Yes," said Villiers, " it is a beautiful 
world ; poets tell us this, and religious men 
have drawn an argument for their creed from 
tlie wisdom and loveliness displayed in the ex- 
ternal universe, which speaks to every heart and 
every understanding. The azure canopy fretted 
with golden lights, or, as now, curtained by 
wondrous shapes, which, though they are akin 
to earth, yet partake the glory of the sky— the 
green expanse, variegated by streams, teeming 
with life, and prolific of food to sustain that 
life, and that very food the chief cause of the 



LODORE. 237 

beauty we enjoy — with such magnificence has 
the Creator set forth our table — all this, and 
the winds that fan us so bahiiily, and tlie flowers 
that enchant our sight — do not all these make 
earth a type of heaven ?"" 

Ethel turned her eyes on him to read in his 
face the expression of the enthusiasm and en- 
joyment that seemed to dictate his words. But 
his countenance was gloomy, and as he con- 
tinued to speak, his expressions took more the 
colour of his uneasy feelings. " How false and 
senseless all this really is r he pursued. " Find 
a people who truly make earth, its woods and 
fells, and inclement sky, their unadorned dwell- 
ing-place, who pluck the spontaneous fruits of 
the soil, or slay the animals as they find them, 
attending neither to culture nor property, and we 
give them the name of barbarians and savages — 
untaught, uncivilized, miserable beings — and we, 
the wiser and more refined, hunt and extermi- 
nate them: — we, who spend so many words, 
either as preachers or philosophers, to vaunt 



238 LODOKE. 

that with which they are satisfied, we feel our- 
selves the greater, the wiser, the nobler, the more 
barriers we place between ourselves and nature, 
the more completely we cut ourselves off frov.] 
her oenerous but simple munificence." 

" Rut is this necessary ?" asked the forest- 
bred girl : " when I lived in the wilds of the 
Illinois — the simplest abode, food and attire, 
were all I knew of human refinements, and 1 
was satisfied.""' 

Villiers did not appear to heed her remark, 
but continued the train of his own reflections. 
" The first desire of man is not for wealth nor 
luxury, but for sympathy and applause. He 
desires to remove to the furthest extremity of 
the world contempt and degradation ; and ac- 
cording to the ideas of the society in which he 
is bred, so are his desires fashioned. We, the 
most civilized, high-bred, prosperous people in 
the world, make no account of nature, unless we 
add the ideas of possession, and of the labours 
of man. We rate each individual, (and we 



LODORE. 239 

all desire to be rated as individuals, distinct 
from and superior to the mass,) not by him- 
self, but by his house, his park, his income. 
This is a trite observation, yet it appears new 
when it comes home : what is lower, humbler, 
more despicable than a poor man ? Give him 
learning, give him goodness — see him with man- 
ners acquired in poverty, habits dyed in the 
dusky hues of penury ; and if we do not despise 
him, yet we do not admit him to our tables or 
society. Refinement may only be the varnish 
of the picture, yet it is necessary to make ap- 
parent to the vulgar eye even the beauties of 
Raphael." 

" To the vulgar eye !"" repeated Ethel, em- 
phatically. 

" And I seem one of those, by the way I 
speak ,"" said Edward, smiling. " Yet, indeed, 
I do not despise any man for being poor, except 
myself. I can feel pride in showing honour 
where honour is due, even though clad in the 
uncouth and forbidding garb of plebeianism ; 
but I cannot claim this for myself — I cannot 



240 LODORE. 

demand the justice of men, which they would 
nickname y^ty. The Illinois would be preferable 
far." 

" And the Illinois might be a paradise/' said 
Ethel. 

" We hope for a better — we hope for Italy. 
Do you remember Rome and the Coliseum, 
my love .^—Naples, the Chiaja, and San Carlo ? 
— these were better than the savannas of the 
west. Our hopes are good ; it is the present only 
which is so thorny, so worse than barren : 
like the souls of Dante, we have a ficr}- pass to 
get through before we reach our place of 
bliss ; that we have it in prospect will gift us 
with fortitude. Meanwhile I must string my- 
self to my task. Ethel, dearest, I shall go to 
town to-morrow." 

" And I with you, surely .^" 

" Do not ask it ; this is your first lesson in 
the lore you were so ready to learn, of bearing 
all for me " 

" With you," interrupted his wife. 

" With me — it shall soon be,"' replied Ed- 



LODORE. 241 

ward ; " but to speak according to the ways of 
this world, my presence in London is necessary 
for a few days — for a very few days; a jour- 
ney there and back for me is nothing, but it 
would be a real and useless expense if you went. 
Indeed, Ethel, you must* submit to my going 
withoutyou — I ask it of you, and you will not 
refuse."*"* 

" A few days, you say,"" answered Ethel — " a 
very few days? It is hard. But you will not 
be angry, if I should join you if your return is 
delayed.?" 

" You will not be so mad," said Villiers. 
" I go with a light heart, because I leave you 
in security and comfort. I will return — I need 
not protest— you know that I shall return the 
moment I can. I speak of a few days ; it can- 
not be a week : let me go then, with what satis- 
faction I may, to the den of darkness and toil, 
and not be farther annoyed by the fear that you 
will not support my absence with cheerfulness. 

VOL. II. M 



242 LODORE. 

As you love me, wait for me with patience — re- 
main with your aunt till I return."'' 

" I will stay for a week, if it must be so/'' re- 
plied Ethel. 

" Indeed, my love, it must — nor will I task 
you beyond — before a week is gone by, you 
shall see me.'"* 

Ethel looked wistfully at him, but said no 
more. She thought it hard— she did not think 
it right that he should go— that he should toil 
and suffer without her ; but she had no words 
for argument or contention, so she yielded. The 
next morning — a cold but cheerful morning — at 
seven o'clock, she drove over with him in Mrs. 
Fitzhenry's little pony chaise to the town, four 
miles off, through which the stages passed. A 
first parting is a kind of landmark in life — a 
starting post whence we begin our career out of 
illusion and the land of dreams, into reality and 
endurance. They arrived not a moment too 
soon : she had yet a thousand things to say — one 



LODORE. 243 

or two very particular things, which she had 
reserved for the last moment ; there was no 
time, and she was forced to concentrate all her 
injunctions into one word, " Write !"" 

" Every day — and do you." 

''It will be my only pleasure," replied his 
wife. " Take care of yourself." 

He was on the top of the stage and gone ; 
and Ethel felt that a blank loneliness had swal- 
lowed up the dearest joy of her life. 

She drew her cloak round her — she gazed 
along the road — there were no traces of him — 
she gave herself up to thought, and as he was 
the object of all her thoughts, this was her best 
consolation. She reviewed the happy days they 
had spent together — she dwelt on the memory 
of his unalterable affection and endearing kind- 
ness, and then tears rushed into her eyes. " Will 
any ill ever befall him ?" she thought. " O no, 
none ever can ! he must be rewarded for his 
goodness and his love. How dear he ought to 
be to me ! Did he not take the poor friendless 

m2 



244 LODORE. 

girl from solitude and grief; and disdaining 
neither her poverty nor her orphan state, give 
her himself, his care, his affection ? O, my 
Edvvard ! what would Ethel have been without 
you ? Her father wjis gone — her mother re- 
pulsed her — she was alone in the wide world, 
till you generously made her your own !" 

With the true enthusiasm of passion, Ethel 
delighted to magnify the benefits she had re- 
ceived, and to make those which she herself 
conferred nothing, that gratitude and love might 
become yet stronger duties. In her heart, though 
she reproached herself for what she termed 
selfishness, she could not regret his poverty and 
difficulties, if thus she should acquire an oppor- 
tunity of being useful to him ; but she felt her- 
self defrauded of her best privileges, of serving 
and consoling, by their separation. 

Thus, — now congratulating herself on her 
husband's attachment, now repining at the fate 
that divided them, — agitated by various emo- 
tions too sweet and bitter for words, she re- 



LODORE. 245 

turned to Longfield. Aunt Bessy was in her 
arm-chair, waiting for her to begin breakfast. 
Edward's seat was empty — his cup was not 
placed — he was omitted in the domestic arrange- 
ments ; — tears rushed into her eyes ; and in 
vain trying to calm herself, she sobbed aloud. 
Aunt Bessy was astonished ; and when all the 
explanation she got was, '* He is gone!" she 
congratulated herself, that her single state had 
spared her the endurance of these conjugal dis- 
tresses. 



246 LODORE. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

How like a winter hath my absence been 
From theCj the pleasure of the fleeting year ! 
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen. 
What old December's bareness every where ! 

Shakspeare. 

Ethel cheered herself to amuse her aunt ; and, 
as in her days of hopeless love, she tried to 
shorten the hours by occupation. It was diffi- 
cult; for all her thoughts were employed in con- 
jectures as to where Edward was, what doing — 
in looking at her watch, and following in her 
mind all his actions— or in meditating how here- 
after she might remedy any remissness on her 
part, (so tender was her conscience,) and best 
contribute to his happiness. Such reveries be- 



LODORE. 247 

guiled many hours, and enabled her to endure 
with some show of courage the pains of absence. 
Each day she heard from him — each day she 
wrote, and this entire pouring out of herself on 
paper formed the charm of her existence. She 
endeavoured to persuade him how fortunate 
their lot might hereafter be — how many of his 
fears were unfounded or misplaced. 

" Remember, dearest love," she said, " that 
I have nothing of the fine lady about me. I do 
not even feel the want of those luxuries so neces- 
sary to most women. This I owe to my father. 
It was his first care, while he brought me up in 
the most jealous retirement, to render me inde- 
pendent of the services of others. Solitude is 
to me no evil, and the delight of my life would 
be to wait upon you. I am not therefore an 
object of pity, when fortunes deprives me of the 
appurtenances of wealth, which rather annoy 
than serve me. My devotion and sacrifice, as 
you are pleased to call the intense wish of my 
heart to contribute to your happiness, are no- 



248 LODORE. 

thing, I sacrifice all, when I give up one hour 
of your society — there is the sting — there the 
merit of my permitting you to go without me. 
I can ill bear it. I am impatient and weak ; 
do not then, Edward dearest, task me too far — 
recall me to your side, if your return is de- 
layed — recall your fond girl to the place near 
your heart, where she desires to remain for 
ever."" 

Villiers answered with few but expressive 
words of gratitude and fidelity. His letters 
breathed disappointment and anxiety. " It is 
too true," he said, " as I found it announced 
when I first came to town, my father is mar- 
ried. He got the banns published in an ob- 
scure church in London ; he persuaded Miss 
Gregory to elope with him, and they are mar- 
ried. Her father is furious, he returns every 
letter unopened ; his house and heart, he says, 

are still open to his daughter — but the , I 

will not repeat his words, who stole her from 
him, shall never benefit by a shilling of his 



LODORE. 219 

money — let her return, and all shall be par- 
doned — let her remain with her husband, and 
starve, he cares not. My father has spent much 
time and more money on this pursuit : in the 
hope of securing many thousands, he raised hun- 
dreds at a prodigal and ruinous interest, which 
must now be paid. He has not ten pounds in 
the world — so he says. My belief is, that he is 
going abroad to secure to himself the payment 
of the scanty remnant of his income. I have 
no hopes. I would beg at the corner of a 
street, rather than apply to a man who never 
has been a parent to me, and whose last act is 
that of a villain. Excuse me ; you will be angry 
that I speak thus of my father, but I know that 
he speaks of the poor girl he has deluded, witli 
a bitterness and insult, wliich prove what liis 
views were in marrying her. In this moment 
of absolute beggary, my only resource is to 
raise money. I believe I shall succeed ; and 
the moment I have put things in train, with 
what heartfelt, what unspeakable joy, shall 

m5 



250 LODORE. 

I leave this miserable place for my own Ethel's 
side, long to remain !" 

Villiers's letters varied little, but yet they 
got more desponding ; and Ethel grew very im- 
patient to see him again. She had counted the 
days of her week — they were fulfilled, and her 
husband did not return. Every thing depend- 
ed, he said, on his presence; and he must re- 
main yet for another day or two. At first he 
implored her to be patient. He besought her, 
as she loved him, to endure their separation yet 
for a few more days. His letters were very 
short, but all in this style. They were impe- 
rative with his wife — she obeyed ; yet she did 
so, she told him, against her will and against 
her sense of right. She ought to be at his side 
to cheer him under his difficulties. She liad 
married him because she loved him, and because 
the first and only wish of her heart was to con- 
duce to his happiness. To trv^vel together, to 
enjoy society and the beauties of nature in each 
other's society, were indeed blessings, and she 



LODORE. 251 

valued them ; but there was another clearer still, 
of which she felt herself defrauded, and for 
which she yearned. " The aim of my life, and 
its only real joy," she said, " is to make your ex- 
istence happier than it would have been without 
me. When I know and feel that such a mo- 
ment or hour has been passed by you with sen- 
sations of pleasure, and that through me, I 
have fulfilled the purpose of my destiny. De- 
prived of the opportunity to accomplish this, I 
am bereft of that for which I breathe. You 
speak as if I were better off here than if I 
shared the inconveniences of your lot — is not 
this strange language, my own Edward "^ You 
talk of security and comfort ; where can I be so 
secure as near you ? And for comfort ! what 
heart-elevating joy it would be to exchange 
this barren, meagre scene of absence^ foi- the 
delight, the comfort of seeing you, of wai ting- 
on you ! I do not ask you to hasten your re- 
turn, so as to injure your prospects, but per- 
mit me to join you. Would not London itself, 



252 LODORE. 

dismal as you describe it, become sunny and 
glad, if Ethel were with you ?" 

To these adjurations Villiers scarcely replied. 
Time crept on ; three weeks had already elapsed. 
Now and then a day intervened, and he did not 
write, and his wife's anxiety grew to an intoler- 
able pitch. She did not for an instant suspect 
his faith, but she feared that he must be utterly 
miserable, since he shrunk from communicating 
his feelings to her. His last letter was brief; 
" I have just come from my solicitor,^' he said, 
" and have but time to say, that I must go 
there again to-morrow, so I shall not be with 
you. O the heavy hours in this dark prison ! 
You will reward me and make me forget them 
when I see you — but how shall 1 pass the time 
till then !^' 

These words made Ethel conceive the idea of 
joining him in town. He would not, he could 
not be angry ? He could not bring his mind 
to ask her to share his discomforts— but ought 
she not to volunteer— to insist upon his per- 



LODORE. 253 

mitting her to come ? Permit ! the same pride 
that prevented his asking, would induce him to 
refuse her request ; but should she do wrong, 
if, without his express permission, she were to 
join him ? A thrill, half fear, half transport, 
made her heart's blood stand still at the thought. 
The day after this last, she got no letter ; the 
following day was Monday, and there would be 
no post from town. Her resolution was taken, 
and she told her aunt, that she should go up to 
London the following day. Mrs. Elizabeth 
knew little of the actual circumstances of the 
young pair. Villiers had made it an express 
condition, that she should not be informed of 
their difficulties, for he was resolute not to take 
from her little store, which, in the way she lived, 
was sufficient, yet barely so, for her wants. She 
did not question her niece as to her journey ; 
she imagined that it was a thing arranged. 
But Ethel herself was full of perplexity ; she re- 
membered what Villiers had said of expense ; 
she knew that he would be deeply hurt if she 



254 LODORE. 

used a public conveyance, and yet to go post 
would consume the little money she had left, 
and she did not like to reach London pennyless. 
She began to talk to her aunt, and faltered out 
something about want of money for posting — 
the good lady's purse was instantly in her hand. 
Ethel had not the same horror as her husband 
of pecuniary obligation — she was too inexperi- 
enced to know its annoyances ; and in the pre- 
sent instance, to receive a small sum from her 
aunt, appeared to her an affair that did not 
merit hesitation. She took twenty pounds for 
her journey, and felt her heart lighter. There 
yet remained another question. Hitherto they 
had travelled in their own carriage, with a valet 
and lady's maid. Villiers had taken his servant 
to town with him. In a postscript to one of his 
letters, he said, " I was able to recommend 
Laurie to a good place, so I have parted with 
him, and I shall not take another servant at this 
moment." Laurie had been long and faithfully 
attached to her husband, who had never lived 



LODORE. 255 

without an attendant, and who, from his careless 
habits, was peculiarly helpless. Ethel felt that 
this dismissal was a measure of economy, and 
that she ought to imitate it. Still as any measure 
to be taken always frightened her, she had not 
courage to discharge her maid, but resolved to 
go up to town without her. Aunt Bessy was 
shocked at her going alone, but Ethel was firm ; 
nothing could happen to her, and she should 
prove to Edward her readiness to endure pri- 
vation. 

On Monday, at eleven in the forenoon, on the 
28th of November, Ethel, having put together 
but a few things, — for she expected a speedy 
return, — stept into her travelling chariot, and 
began her journey to town. She was all delight 
at the idea of seeing Edward. She reproached 
herself for having so long delayed giving this 
proof of her earnest affection. She listened 
with beaming smiles to all her aunt's injunctions 
and cautions : and, the carriage once in motion, 
drawing her shawl round her, as she sat in tlic 



256 LODORE. 

corner, looking on the despoiled yet clear pros- 
pect, her mind was filled with the most agree- 
able reveries — her heart soothed by the dearest 
anticipations. 

To pay the post-horses — to gift the postillion 
herself, were all events for her : she felt proud. 
"Edward said, I must begin to learn the ways 
of the world ; and this is my first lesson in eco- 
nomy and care," she thought, as she put into 
the post-boy's hand just double the sum he had 
ever received before. " And how good, and 
attentive, and willing every body is ! I am sure 
women can very well travel alone. Every one is 
respectful, and desirous to serve," was her next 
internal remark, as she undrew her little silken 
purse, to give a waiter half-a-crown, who had 
brought her a glass of water, and whose extreme 
alacrity struck her as so very kind-hearted. 

Her spirits flagged as the day advanced. In 
spite of herself, an uneasy feeling diffused itself 
through her mind, when, the sun going down, 
a misty, chilly twilight crept over the landscape. 



LODORE. 257 

Had she done right ? she asked herself; would 
Edward indeed be glad to see her? She felt 
half frightened at her temerity— alarmed at the 
length of her journey — timid when she thought 
of the vast London she was about to enter, 
without any certain bourn. She supposed that 
Villiers went each day to his club, and she 
knew that he lodged in Duke Street, St. James's ; 
but she was ignorant of the number of the 
house, and the street itself was unknown to her ; 
she did not remember ever to have been in it in 
her life. 

Her carriage entered labyrinthine London by 
Blackwall, and threaded the wilds of Lothbury. 
A dense and ever-thickening mist, palpable, 
yellow, and impervious to the eye, enveloped 
the whole town. Ethel had heard of a Novem- 
ber fog ; but she had never witnessed one, and 
the idea of it did not occur to her memory : 
she was half-frightened, thinking that some 
strange phasnomena were going on, and fancying 
that l\er postillion was hurrying forward in 



258 LODORE. 

terror. At last, in Cheapside, they stopped 
jammed up by carts and coaches ; and then she 
contrived to make herself heard, asking what 
was the matter ? The word " eclipse"" hung 
upon her lips. 

" Only, ma'am, the street has got blocked up 
like in the fog : we shall get on presently." 

The word " fog" solved the mystery ; and 
again her thoughts were with Villiers. What a 
horrible place for him to live in! And he had 
been enduring all this wretchedness, while she 
was breathing the pure atmosphere of the coun- 
try. Again they proceeded through the " murky 
air," and through an infinitude of mischances; — 
the noise — the hubbub— the crowd, as she could 
distinguish it, as if veiled by dirty gauze, by 
the lights in the shops— all agitated and vexed 
her. Through Fleet Street and the Strand they 
went ; and it seemed as if their progress would 
never come to an end. The wliole previous 
journey from Longfield was short in comparison 
to this tedious procession : twenty times she 



LODORE. 259 

longed to get out and walk. At last they got 
free, and with a quicker pace drove up to the 
door of the Union Club, in Charing Cross. 

The post-boy called one of the waiters to the 
carriage door ; and Ethel asked — " Is Mr. Vil- 
liers here ?" 

" Mr. Villiers, ma'am, has left town," 

Ethel was aghast. She had watched assidu- 
ously along the road ; yet she had felt certain 
that if he had meant to come, she would have 
seen him on Sunday ; and till this moment, 
she had not entertained a real doubt but that 
she should find him. She asked, falteringly, 
" When did he go .?" • 

*' Last week, ma'am : last Thursday, I think 
it was." 

Ethel breathed again : the man's information 
must be false. She was too inexperienced to be 
aware that servants and common people have a 
singular tact in selecting the most unpleasant 
intelligence, and being very alert in communi- 
cating it. " Do you know," she inquired, 
"• where Mr. Villiers lodges ?" 



2G0 LODORE. 

*' Can't say, indeed, ma'am ; but the porter 
knows ; —here, Saunders ! " 

No Saunders answered. " The porter is not 
in the way ; but if you can wait, ma'am, he'll 
be back presently." 

The waiter disappeared : the post-boy canie 
up— he touched his hat. " Wait/' said Ethel; 
— " we must wait a little ;'"' and he removed 
himself to the horses' heads. Ethel sat in her 
lonely corner, shrouded by fog and darkness, 
watching every face as it passed under the lamp 
near, fancying that Edward might appear 
among them. The ugly faces that haunt, in 
quick succession, the imagination of one op- 
pressed by night-mare, might vie with those 
that passed successively in review before Ethel. 
Most of them hurried on, looking neither to the 
right nor left. Some entered the house ; some 
glanced at her carriage : one or two, perceiving 
a bonnet, evidently questioned the waiter. He 
stood there for her own service, Ethel thought ; 
and she watched his every movement — his sue- 



LODORE. 261 

cessive disappearances and returns — the people 
he talked to. Once she signed to him to come ; 
but — " No, ma'am, the porter is not come back 
yet," — was all his answer. At last, after having 
stood, half whistling, for some five minutes, (it 
appeared to Ethel half-an-hour,) without having 
received any visible communication, he suddenly 
came up to the carriage door, saying, " The 
porter could not stay to speak to you, ma'am, 
he was in such a hurr3^ He says, Mr. Villiers 
lodges in Duke Street, St. James's : he should 
know the house, but has forgotten the number.'" 

" Then I must wait till he comes back again. 
I knew all that before. Will he be long- ?" 

" A long time, ma'am ; two hours at least. 
He said that the woman of the house is a widow 
woman — Mrs. Derham." 

Thus, as if by torture, (but, as with the 
whipping boys of old, her\s was the torture, not 
the delinquent's,) Ethel extracted some infor- 
mation from the stupid, conceited fellow. On slie 
went to Duke Street, to discover Mrs. Derham's 



262 LODORE. 

residence. A few wrong doors were knocked 
at ; and a beer-boy, at last, was the Mercury 
that brought the impatient, longing wife, to the 
threshold of her husband's residence. Happy 
beer-boy ! She gave him a sovereign : he had 
never been so rich in his life before ; — such 
chance-medleys do occur in this strange world ! 



LODORE. 263 



CHAPTER XV. 

my reviving joy ! thy quickening presence 
Makes the sad night 

Sit like a youthful spring upon my blood. 

1 cannot make thy welcome rich enough 
^rith all the wealth of words. 

MlDDLETON. 

The boy knocked at the door. A servant-girl 
opened it. " Does Mr. Villiers lodge here ?'"' 
asked the postillion, from his horse. 

" Yes," said the girl. 

" Open the door quickly, and let me out !'' 
cried Ethel, as her heart beat fast and loud. 

The door was opened — the steps let down — 
operations tedious beyond measure, as she 



264 LODORE. 

thought. She got out, and was in the hall, 
going up stairs. 

" Mr. Villiers is not at home," said the maid. 

Through the low blinds of the parlour win- 
dow, Mrs. Derham had been watching what 
was going on. She heard what her servant 
said, and now came out. " Mr. Villiers is not 
at home,'' she reiterated ; *' will you leave any 
message.'^" 

" No ; I will wait for him. Show me into 
his room." 

" I am afraid that it is locked," answered 
Mrs. Derham repulsively : " perhaps you can 
call again. Who shall I say asked for him ?'^ 

" O no !" cried Ethel, " I must wait for him. 
Will you permit me to wait in your parlour ? 
I am Mrs. Villiers." 

"I beg pardon," said the good woman; " Mrs. 
Villiers is in the country." 

"And so I am,"" replied Ethel — "at least, so 
I was this morning. Don't you see my travel- 
ling carriage ? — look ; you may be sure that I 
am Mrs. Villiers." 



LODORE. 265 

She took out of her little bag one of Edward's 
letters, with the perusal of which she had be- 
guiled much of her way to town. Mrs. Derham 
looked at the direction — " The Honourable 
Mrs. Villiers;" — her countenance brightened. 
Mrs. Derham was a little, plump, well-preserved 
woman of fifty-four or five. She was kind- 
hearted, and of course shared the worship for 
rank which possesses every heart born within 
the four seas. She was now all attention. Vil- 
liers's room was open ; he was expected very 
soon : — " He is so seldom out in an evening : it 
is very unlucky; but he must be back directly,"" 
said Mrs. Derham, as she showed the way up 
the narrow staircase. Ethel reached the land- 
ing, and entered a room of tolerable dimensions, 
considerably encumbered with litter, which 
opened into a smaller room, with a tent bed. 
A little bit of fire glimmered in the grate. The 
whole place looked excessively forlorn and com- 
fortless. 

Mrs. Derham bustled about to bestow a little 

VOL. II. N 



266 LODORE. 

neatness on the room, saying something of the 
'' untidiness of gentlemen," and " so many 
lodgers in the house." Ethel sat down • she 
longed to be alone. There was the post-boy to 
be paid, and to be ordered to take the carriage 
to a coach-house ; and then — Mrs. Derham 
asked her if she would not have something to 
eat ; she herself was at tea, and offered a cup, 
which Ethel thankfully accepted, acknowledging 
that she had not eaten since the morning. IMrs. 
Derham was shocked. The rank, beauty, and 
sweet manners of Ethel had made a conquest, 
w^hich her extreme youth redoubled. '* So 
young a lady," she said, " to go about alone : 
she did not know how to take care of herself, 
she was sure. She must have some supper : a 
roast ch'ixil<en should be ready in an hour — by 
the time Mr. Villiers came in."*"* 

" But the tea,"" said Ethel, smiling ; " you 
will let me have that now ?^^ 

Mrs. Derham hurried away on this hint, and 
the young wife was left alone. She had been 



LODORE. 267 

married a year ; but there was still a freshness 
about her feelings, which gave zest to every 
change in her wedded life. " This is where he 
has been living without me," she thought ; 
" Poor Edward ! it does not look as if he were 
very comfortable." 

She rose from her seat, and began to arrange 
the books and papers. A glove of her husband's 
lay on the table : she kissed it with a glad feel- 
ing of welcome. When the servant came in, 
she had the fire replenished — the hearth swept; 
and in a minute or two, the room had lost much 
of its disconsolate appearance. Then, with a 
continuation of her feminine love of order she 
arranged her own dress and hair ; giving to her 
attire, as much as possible, an at-home appear- 
ance. She had just finished — just, sat down, 
and begun to find the time long — when a quick, 
imperative knock at the door, which she recog- 
nized at once, made her heart beat, and her 
cheek grow pale. She heard a step — a voice — 
and Mrs. Derham answer — " Yes, sir ; the fire 

N 2 



268 LODORZ. 

is in — every thing comfortable ;'"* — and Ethel 
opened the door, as she spoke, and in an instant 
was clasped in her husband's arms. 

It was not a moment whose joy could be ex- 
pressed by words. He had been miserable during 
her absence, and had thought of sending for hei ; 
but he looked round his single room, remem^ 
bered that he was in lodgings, and gave up hi> 
purpose with a bitter murmur : and here she 
was, uncalled for, but most welcome : she was 
here, in her youth, her loveliness, her sweetness : 
these were charms ; but others more transcend- 
ent now attended on, and invested her ; — the 
sacred tenderness of a wife had led her to ]ii> 
side; and love, in its most genuine and beau- 
tiful shape, shed an atmospliere of delight and 
worship about her. Not one circumstance could 
alloy the unspeakable bliss of their meetinp.. 
Poverty, and its humiliations, vanished from 
before the eyes of Villiers *, he was overflow - 
ingly rich in the possession of her affections — 
her presence. Again and again he thanked her, 
in broken accents of expressive transport. 



LODORE. 269 

" Nothing in the whole world could make 
me unhappy now !" he cried ; and Ethel, who 
had seen his face look elongated and gloomy at 
the moment he had entered, felt indeed that 
Medea, with all her potent herbs, was less of a 
magician than she, in the power of infusing the 
sparkling spirit of life into one human frame. 
It was long before either were coherent in their 
inquiries and replies. There was nothing, in- 
deed, that either wished to know. Life, and 
its purposes, were fulfilled, rounded, complete, 
without a flaw. They loved, and were together 
— together, not for a transitory moment, but 
for the whole duration of the eternity of love, 
which never could be exhausted in their hearts. 

After more than an hour spent in gradually 
becoming acquainted and familiar with tlie 
transporting change, from separate loneliness 
to mutual society and sympathy, the good- 
natured face of Mrs. Derham showed itself, to 
announce that Ethel's supper was ready. These 
words brought back to Edward's recollection 



270 LODORE. 

his wife's journey, and consequent fatigues : 
he grew more desirous than Mrs. Derham to 
feed his poor famished bird, whose eyes, in 
spite of the joy that shone in them, began to 
look languid, and whose cheek was pale. The 
little supper-table was laid, and they sat down 
together. 

Lady Mary Wortley Montagu has recorded 
the pleasure to be reaped 

" When we meet with champagne and a chicken at last ;" 

and perhaps social life contains no combination so 
full of enjoyment as a tete-a-tete supper. Here it 
was, with its highest zest. They feared no pry- 
ing eyes — they knew no ill : it was not a scanty 
hour of joy snatched from an age of pain — a 
single spark illuminating a long blank night. 
It came after separation, and possessed, there- 
fore, the charm of novelty ; but it was the pre- 
lude to a long reunion — the seal set on their 
being once again joined, to go through together 
each hour of the livelong day. Full of unut- 



LODORE. 271 

terable thankfulness and gladness, as were the 

minds of each, there was, besides, 

'' A sacred and home-felt delight, 
A sober certainty of waking bliss," 

which is the crown and fulfilment of perfect 
human happiness. " Imparadised" by each 
other's presence — no doubt — no fear of division 
on the morrow — no dread of untoward event, 
suspicion, or blame, clouded the balmy atmo- 
sphere which their hearts created around them. 
No Eden was required to enhance their happi- 
ness ; there needed no 

'' Crisped brooks. 
Rolling on orient pearl and sands of gold ;" — 

no 

" Happy, rural seat, with various view," 

decked with 

" Flowers of all hue, ' 

" All trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste ;" — 

nor " cool recess," nor 

" Vernal airs, 
Breathing the smell of field and grove." 



272 LODORE. 

In their narrow abode — their nook of a room, 
cut off from the world, redolent only of smoke 
and fog — their two fond hearts could build up 
bowers of delight, and store them with all of 
ecstasy which the soul of man can know, with- 
out any assistance of eye, or ear, or scent. So 
rich, and prodigal, and glorious, in its gifts, is 
faithful and true-hearted love, — when it knows 
the sacrifices which it must make to merit them, 
and consents willingly to forego vanity, selfish- 
ness, and the exactions of self-will, in unlimited 
and unregretted exchange. 

Mutual esteem and gratitude sanctified the 
unreserved sympathy which made each so happy 
in the other. Did they love the less for not 
loving " in sin and fear .?'"* Far from it. The 
certainty of being the cause of good to each 
other tended to foster the most delicate of all 
passions, more than the rougher ministrations of 
terror, and a knowledge that each was the occa- 
sion of injury to the other. A woman's heart is 
peculiarly unfitted to sustain this conflict. Her 






LODORE. 273 

sensibility gives keenness to her imagination, 
and she magnifies every peril, and writhes be- 
neath every sacrifice which tends to humiliate 
her in her own eyes. The natural pride of 
her sex struggles with her desire to confer hap- 
piness, and her peace is wrecked. 

Far different was the happy Ethel's situation 
— far otherwise were her thoughts employed 
than in concealing the pangs of care and shame. 
The sense of riglit adorned the devotion of love. 
She read approbation in Edward's eyes, and 
drew near him in full consciousness of deserv- 
ing it. They sat at their supper, and long 
after, by the cheerful fire, talking of a thousand 
things connected with the present and the fu- 
ture — the long, long future which they were to 
spend together; and every now and then their 
eyes sparkled with the gladness of renewed de- 
light in seeing each other. " Mine, my own, 
for ever !*" — And was this exultation in posses- 
sion to be termed selfish ? by no other reasoning 
surely, than that used by a cold and meaningless 

N 5 



274 LODORE. 

philosophy, which gives this name to generosity 
and truth, and all the nobler passions of the soul. 
They congratulated themselves on this mutual 
property, partly because it had been a free gift 
one to the other ; partly because they looked 
forward to the right it ensured to each, of con- 
ferring mutual benefits ; and partly through the 
instinctive love God has implanted for that 
which, being ours, is become the better part of 
ourselves. They were united for " better and 
worse,"' and there was a sacredness in the thought 
of the " worse""* they miglit share, which gave a 
mysterious and celestial charm to the present 
" better." 



LODORE. 275 



CHAPTER XVII. 

Do you not think yourself truly happy? 
You have the abstract of all sweetness by you, 
The precious wealth youth labours to arrive at. 
Nor is she less in honour than in beauty. 

Beaumont and Fletcher. 

The following day was one of pouring, uninter- 
mitting rain. Villiers and Ethel drew their 
chairs near their cheerful fire, and were happy. 
Edward could not quite conquer his repug- 
nance to seeing his wife in lodgings, and in 
those also of so mean and narrow a description. 
But the spirit of Ethel was more disencumbered 
of earthly particles : that had found its rest in 
the very home of I^ove. The rosy light of the 



276 LODORE. 

divinity invested all things for her. Cleopatra 
on the Cydnus, in the bark which — 

" Like a burnished throne 
Burnt on the water," 

borne along 

'* By purple sails .... 
.... So perfumed, that 
The winds were love-sick with them ;" 

was not more gorgeously attended than Ethel 
was to her own fancy, lapped and cradled in all 
that love has of tender, voluptuous, and con- 
fiding. 

Several days past before Villiers could with- 
draw her from this blissful dream, to gaze upon 
the world as it was. He could not make her dis- 
gusted with her fortunes nor her abode, but he 
awakened anxiety on his own account. His 
father, as he had conjectured, was gone to Paris, 
leaving merely a message for his son, that he 
would willingly join him in any act for raising 



LODORE. 277 

money, by mortgage or the absolute disposal of 
a part of the estate. Edward had consulted 
with his solicitor, who was to look over a vast 
variety of papers, to discover the most eligible 
mode of making some kind of sale. Delay, in 
all its various shapes, waited on these arrange- 
ments ; and Villiers was very averse to leaving 
town till he held some clue to the labyrinth of 
obstacles which presented themselves at every 
turn. He talked of their taking a house in 
town ; but Ethel would not hear of such extra- 
vagance. In the first place, their actual means 
were at a very low ebb, with little hope of a 
speedy supply. There was another circum- 
stance, the annoyance of which he understood 
far better than Ethel could. He had raised 
money on annuities, the interest of which he was 
totally unable to pay ; this exposed him to a 
personal risk of the most disagreeable kind, and 
he knew that his chief creditor was on the point 
of resorting to harsh measures against him. 
These things, dingy-visaged, dirty-handed rca- 



278 LODORE. 

lities as they were, made a strange contrast with 
Ethel's feeling of serene and elevated bliss ; but 
she, with unshrinking heart, brought the same 
fortitude and love into the crooked and sordid 
ways of modern London, which had adorned 
heroines of old, as they wandered amidst track- 
less forests, and over barren mountains. 

Several days passed, and the weather became 
clear, though cold. The young pair walked 
together in the parks at such morning hours as 
would prevent their meeting any acquaintances, 
for Edward was desirous that it should not be 
known that they were in town. Villiers also 
traced his daily, weary, disappointing way to 
his solicitor, where he found things look more 
blank and dismal each day. Then wlien even- 
ing came, and the curtains were drawn, they 
might have been at the top of Mount Caucasus, 
instead of in the centre of London, so com- 
pletely were they cut off from every thing ex- 
cept each other. They then felt absolutely 
happy : the lingering disgusts of Edward were 



LODORE. 279 

washed clean away by the bounteous, ever- 
springing love, that flowed, as waters from a 
fountain, from the heart of Ethel, in one per- 
petual tide. 

In those hours of unchecked talk, she learned 
many things she had not known before — the 
love of Horatio Saville for Lady Lodore was 
revealed to her; but the story was not truly 
told, for the prejudices as well as the ignorance 
of Villiers rendered him blind to the sincerity of 
Cornelia's aff*ection and regret. Ethel won- 
dered, and in spite of the charm with which 
she delighted to invest the image of her mo- 
ther, she could not help agreeing with her 
husband that she must be irrevocably wedded 
to the most despicable worldly feelings, so 
to have played with the heart of a man such 
as Horatio : a man, whose simplest word bore 
the stamp of truth and genius ; one of those 
elected few whom nature elevates to her own 
high list of nobility and greatness. How could 
she, a simple girl, interest feelings wliich were 



280 LODORE. 

not alive to Saville's merits? She could only 
hope that in some dazzling marriage Lady 
Lodore would find a compensation for the 
higher destiny which might have been hers, but 
that, like the " base Indian,"*' she had thrown 

" A pearl away, 
Richer than all his tribe." 

There was a peaceful quiet in their secluded 
and obscure life, which somewhat resembled the 
hours spent on board ship, when you long for, 
yet fear, the conclusion of the voyage, and 
shrink involuntarily from exchanging a state, 
whose chief blessing is an absence of every care, 
for the variety of pains and pleasures which 
chequer life. Ethel possessed her all — so near, 
so undivided, so entirely her own, that she could 
not enter into Villiers's impatience, nor quite 
sympathize with the disquietude he could not 
repress. After considerable delays, his solici- 
tor informed him that his father had so entirely 
disposed of all his interest in the property, that 



LODORE. 281 

his readiness to join in any act of sale would be 
useless. The next thing to be done was for 
Edward to sell a part of his expectations, and 
the lawyer promised to find a purchaser, and 
begged to see him three days hence, when no 
doubt he should have some proposal to com- 
municate. 

Whoever has known what such things are — 
whoever has waited on the demurs and objec- 
tions, and suffered the alternations of total 
failure and suddenly renewed hopes, which are 
the Tantalus- food held to the lips of those 
under the circumstances of Villiers, can follow 
in imagination his various conferences with his 
solicitor, as day after day something new was 
discovered, still to drag on, or to impede, the 
tortoise pace of his negociations. It will be no 
matter of wonder to such, that a month instead 
of three days wasted away, and found him pre- 
cisely in the same position, with hopes a little 
raised, though so frequently blasted, and no- 
thing done. 



282 LODORE. 

In recording the annoyances, or rather the ad- 
versity which the young pair endured at this 
period, a risk is run, on the one hand, of being 
censured for bringing the reader into contact 
with degrading and sordid miseries ; and on the 
other, of laying too much stress on circumstances 
which will appear to those in a lower sphere of 
life, as scarcely deserving the name of misfor- 
tune. It is very easy to embark on the wild 
ocean of romance, and to steer a danger-fraught 
passage, amidst giant perils, — the very words 
employed, excite the imagination, and give grace 
to the narrative. But all beautiful and fairy- 
like as was Ethel Villiers, in tracing her for- 
tunes, it is necessary to descend from such 
altitudes, to employ terms of vulgar use, and to 
describe scenes of common-place and debasing 
interest ; so that, if she herself, in her youth and 
feminine tenderness, does not shed light and 
holiness around her, we shall grope darkling, 
and fail utterly in the scope which we proposed 
to ourselves in selecting her history for the en- 
tertainment of the reader. 



LODORE. 283 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

I saw her upon nearer view, 
A Spirit, yet a Woman too ! 
A Creature not too bright or good 
For human nature's daily food ; 
For transient sorrows, simple wiles, 
Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears, and smiles. 

Wordsworth. 

The end of December had come. New year's 
day found and left them still in Duke Street. 
On the 4th of January Villiers received a 
letter from his uncle, Lord Maristovi^, entrusting 
a commission to him, which obliged him to go 
to the neighbourhood of Egham. Not having 
a horse, he went by the stage. He set out so 
late in the day that there was no chance of his 



284 LODORE. 

returning the same night ; and he promised to 
be back early on the morrow. Ethel had let- 
ters to write to Italy and to her aunt ; and with 
these she tried to beguile the time. She felt 
lonely ; the absence of Villiers for so many 
hours engendered an anxiety, which she found 
some difficulty in repressing. Accustomed to 
have him perpetually at her side, and without 
any other companion or resource, she repined 
at her solitude. There was his empty chair, 
and no hope that he would occupy it ; and she 
sat in her little room so near to thousands, and 
yet so cut off from every one, with such a sense 
of desolation as Mungo Park might have felt in 
central Africa, or a shipwrecked mariner on an 
uninhabited island. 

Her pen was taken up, but she did not write. 
She could not command her thoughts to express 
any thing but the overflowing, devoted, all- 
engrossing affection of her heart, her adoration 
for her husband ; that would not amuse Lucy, — 
she thouglit : and she had commenced another 



LODORE. 285 

sheet with "My dearest Aunt," when the maid- 
servant ushered a man into her presence — a 
stranger, a working man. What could he want 
with her ? He seemed confused, and stammered 
out, " Mr. Villiers is not in ?" 

" He will be at home to-morrow, if you want 
him ; or have you any message that I can 
give .^" 

" You are Mrs. Villiers, ma'am ?" 

" Yes, my good man, I am Mrs. Villiers." 

" If you please, ma'am, I am Saunders, one 
of the porters at the Union Club." 

" I remember : has any message come there ? 
or does Mr. Villiers owe you any money ?" and 
her purse was in her hand. 

" O no, ma'am. Mr. Villiers is a good gen- 
tleman ; and he has been petiklar generous to 
me — and that is why I come, because I a mi 
afraid," continued the man, lowering his tone, 
" that he is in danger." 

"Good heavens! Where? how?" cried 
Ethel, starting from her chair, " tell me at 
once." 



286 LODORE. 

" Yes, ma'am, I will ; so you must know 
that this evening '' 

" Yes, this evening. What has happened r 
^•' he left me at six o'clock — what is it ?" 

" Nothing, I hope, this evening, ma'am. I 
am only afraid for to-moi*row morning. And I 
will tell you all I know, as quick as ever I 
can." 

The man then proceeded to relate, that some 
one had been inquiring about Mr. Villiers at 
the Club House. One of the servants had told 
him that he lived in Duke Street, St. James's, 
and that was all he knew ; but Saunders came 
up, and the man questioned him. He instantly 
recognized the fellow, and knew what his busi- 
ness must be. And he tried to deceive him, 
and declared that Mr. Villiers was gone out of 
town ; but the fellow said that he knew better 
than that ; and that he had been seen that very 
day in the Strand. He should look for him, 
no thanks to Saunders, in Duke Street. " And 
so, ma'am, you see they'll be sure to be here 



LODORE. 2S7 

early to-morrow morning. So don't let Mr. 
Villiers stay here, on no account whatsomever."'' 

" Why ?" asked Ethel, simply; " they can't 
hurt him." 

*' I am sure, ma'am," said Saunders, his face 
brightening, " I am very glad to hear that — 
you know best. They will arrest him for sure, 
but ^" 

" Arrest him !" 

" Yes, ma'am, for I've seen the tall one be- 
fore. There were two of them — bailiffs." 

Ethel now began to tremble violently ; these 
were strange, cabalistic words to her, the more 
awful from their mystery. " What am I to 
do ?" she exclaimed ; " Mr. Villiers will be 
here in the morning, he sleeps at Egham, and 
will be here early ; I must go to him directly." 

"I am glad to hear he is so far," said 
Saunders ; " and if I can be of any use you 
have but to say it ; shall I go to Egham ? there 
are night coaches that go through, and I might 
warn him." 



288 LODORE. 

Ethel thought — she feared to do any thing — 
she imagined that she should be watched, that 
all her endeavours would be of no avail. She 
looked at the man, honesty was written on his 
face ; but there was no intelligence, nothing to 
tell her that his advice was good. The possi- 
bility of such an event as the present had never 
occurred to her. Villiers had been silent with re- 
gard to his fears on this head. She was suddenly 
transported into a strange sea, hemmed in by 
danger, without a pilot or knowledge of a pas- 
sage. Again she looked at the man's face : 
" What is best to be done !"" she exclaimed. 

" I am sure, ma'am," he replied, as if she 
had asked him the question, " I think what I 
said is best, if you will tell me where I can 
find Mr. Villiers. I should think nothing of 
going, and he could send word by me what he 
wished you to do." 

" Yes, that would indeed be a comfort. 1 
will write three lines, and you shall take them."'' 
In a moment she had written. " Give this note 



LODORE. 289 

into his own hand, he will sleep there — I have 
written the direction of the house — or at some 
inn, at Egham. Do not rest till you have given 
the letter, and here is for your trouble." She 
held out two sovereigns. 

" Depend on me, ma'am ; and I will bring 
an answer to you by nine in the morning. Mr. 
Villiers will pay me what he thinks fit — you 
may want your money. Only, ma'am, don't be 
frightened when them men come to-morrow — if 
the people here are good sort of folks, you had 
better give them a hint — it may save you 
trouble." 

'^ Thank you : you are a good man, and I 
will remember you, and reward you. B}^ nine 
to-morrow — you will be punctual .?" 

The man again assured her that he would 
use all diligence, and took his leave. 

Ethel felt totally overwhelmed by these tidings. 
The unknown is always terrible, and the ideas 
of arrest, and prison, and bolts, and bars, and 
straw, floated before her imagination. Was Vil- 

VOL. II. o 



290 LODORE. 

liers safe even where he was ? Would not the 
men make inquiries, learn where he had gone, 
and follow him, even if it were to the end of 
the world ? She had heard of the activity em- 
ployed to arrest criminals, and mingled every 
kind of story in her head, till she grew des- 
perate from terror. Not knowing what else to 
do, she became eager for Mrs. Derham's advice, 
and hurried down stairs to ask it. 

She had not seen much of the good lady 
since her first arrival. Every day, when Vil- 
liers went out, she came up, indeed, on the 
momentous question of " orders for dinner ;" 
and then she bestowed the benefit of some five 
or ten minutes garrulity on her fair lodger. 
Ethel learnt that she had seen better days, 
and that were j ustice done her, she ought to be 
riding in her coach, instead of letting lodgings. 
She learnt that she had a married daughter 
living at Kennington : poor enough, but strug- 
gling on cheerfully with her mother's help. The 
best girl in the world slie was, and a jewel of a 



LODORE. 291 

wife, and had two of the most beautiful children 
that ever were beheld. 

This was all that Ethel knew, except that 
once Mrs, Derham had brought her one of her 
grandchildren to be seen and admired. In all 
that the good woman said, there was so much 
kindness, such a cheerful endurance of the ills 
of life, and she had shown such a readiness to 
oblige, that the idea of applying to her for ad- 
vice, relieved Ethel's mind of much of its load 
of anxiety. 

She was too much agitated to think of ringing 
for the servant, to ask to see her ; but hurried 
down stairs, and knocked at the parlour- door 
almost before she was aware of what she was 
doing. '' Come in," said a feminine voice, Ethel 
entered, and started to see one she knew ; — and 
yet again she doubted ; — was it indeed Fanny 
Derham whom she beheld ? 

The recognition afforded mutual pleasure: 
checked a little on Ethel's part, by her anxi- 
eties ; and on Fanny's, by a feeling that she 



292 LODORE. 

had been neglected by her friend. A few letters 
had passed between them, when first Ethel had 
visited Longfield : since then their correspond- 
ence had been discontinued till after her return 
to England, from Italy, when Mrs. Villiers had 
wrote ; but her letter was returned by the post- 
office, no such person being to be found accord- 
ing to the address. 

The embarrassment of the moment passed 
away. Ethel forgot, or rather did not advert 
to, her friend's lowly destiny, in the joy of 
meeting her again. After a minute or two, also, 
they had become familiar with the change that 
time had operated in their youthful appearance, 
which was not much, and most in Ethel. Her 
marriage, and conversance with the world, had 
changed her into a woman, and endowed her 
with easy manners and self-possession. Fanny 
was still a mere girl ; tall, beyond the middle 
height, yet her young, ingenuous countenance 
was unaltered, as well as that singular mixture 
of mildness and independence, in her manners. 



LODORE. 293 

which had always characterized her. Her light 
blue eyes beamed with intelligence, and her smile 
expressed the complacency and condescension 
of a superior being. Her beauty was all intel- 
lectual: open, sincere, passionless, yet benignant, 
you approached her without fear of encounter- 
ing any of the baser qualities of human beings, — 
their hypocrisy, or selfishness. Those who have 
seen the paintings of the calm-visaged, blue-eyed 
deities of the frescos of Pompeii, may form an 
idea of the serene beauty of Fanny Derham. 

When Mrs. Villiers entered, she was reading 
earnestly — a large dictionary open before her. 
The book on which she v/as intent was in Greek 
characters. " You have not forgotten your old 
pursuits," said Ethel, smiling. 

" Say rather I am more wedded to them than 
ever," she replied ; " since, more than ever, I 
need them to give light and glory to a dingy 
world. But you, dear Ethel, if so I may call 
you, — you looked anxious as you entered . you 
wish to speak to my mother; — she is gone to 

o3 



294 LODORE. 

Kennington, and will not return to-night. Can 
I be of any use ?"' 

Her mother ! how strange I and Mrs. Der- 
ham, while she had dilated with pride on her 
elder daughter, had never mentioned this pearl 
of price, which was her's also. 

" Alas ! I fear not !" replied Ethel ; " it is 
experience I need — experience in things you can 
know nothing about, nor your mother either, 
probably ; yet she may have heard of such 
things, and know how to advise me." 

Mrs. Villiers then explained the source of her 
disquietude. Fanny listened with looks of the 
kindest sympathy. " Even in such things/' 
she said, " I have had experience. Adversity 
and I are become very close friends since I last 
saw you : we are intimate, and I know much 
good of her ; so she is grateful, and repays me 
by prolonging her stay. Be composed : no ill 
will happen, I trust, to Mr. Villiers;— at least 
you need not be afraid of his being pursued. 
If the man vou have sent be active and faithful, 



LODORE. 295 

all will be well. I will see these troublesome 
people to-morrow, when they come, and pre- 
vent your being annoyed. If Saunders returns 
early, and brings tidings of Mr. Villiers, you 
will know what his wishes are. You can do 
nothing more to-night; and there is every pro- 
bability that all will be well." 

"Do you really think so?" cried Mrs. Vil- 
liers. " O that I had gone with him ! — never 
will I again let him go any where without 
me." 

Fanny entered into more minute explanations, 
and succeeded, to a great degree, in calming her 
friend. She accompanied her back to her own 
room, and sat with her long. She entered into 
the details of her own history : — the illness and 
death of her fatlier ; the insulting treatment her 
mother had met from his family ; the kindness 
of a relation of her own, who had assisted them, 
and enabled them to pursue their present mode 
of life, which procured them a livelihood. Fanny 
spoke generally of these circumstances, and in a 



296 LODORE. 

spirit that seemed to disdain that such things 
were ; not because they were degrading in the 
eyes of others, but because they interfered with 
the philosophic leisure, and enjoyment of nature, 
which she so dearly prized. She thought no- 
thing of privation, or the world'*s impertinence ; 
but much of being immured in the midst of 
London, and being forced to consider the in- 
glorious necessities of life. Her desire to be 
useful to her mother induced her often to spend 
precious time in " making the best of things," 
which she would readily have dispensed with 
altogether, as the easiest, as well as the wisest, 
way of freeing herself from their trammels. 
Her narration interested Ethel, and served to 
calm her mind. She thought — " Can I not bear 
those cares with equanimity for Edward's sake, 
which Fanny regards as so trivial, merely be- 
cause Plato and Epictetus bid her do so ? Will 
not the good God, who has implanted in her 
heart so cheerless a consolation, bring comfort 
to mine, which has no sorrow but for another's 
sake.?" 



LODORE. 297 

These reflections tranquillized her, when she 
laid her head on her pillow at night. She re- 
signed her being and destiny to a Power supe- 
rior to any earthly authority, with a conviction, 
that its most benign influence would be ex- 
tended over her. 



END OF VOL. II. 