VALPERGA. 



CHAPTER I. 

The Witch of the Forest, 

VVlIEI^ Bindo bad been released by the com- 
mand of Castiglione from the hands of the 
Lucchese soldiers, he fled across the country ; 
and, possessed with horror and despair at the 
issue of all his predictions, hastened to the only 
liuman being to whom he ever spoke his real 
sentiments, or in whom he placed any confi- 
dence. 

To the north of Lucca, where the mountains 
rise highest, and the country is most wild, there 
was, at the period. those people lived concern- 
ing whom 1 write, an immense ilex wood, 
which covered the Apennines, and was lost to 

VOL, nu B 



fiS7rmQ 



S VALPERGA. [Ch. I. 

sight in the grey distance, and among the folds 
and declivities of the hills. In this forest there 
lived a witch ; she inhabited a cottage built 
partly of the trunks of trees, partly of stones, and 
partly was inclosed by the side of the mountain 
against which it leaned. This hut was very 
old ; that part of it which was built of stone 
was covered with moss, lichens and wall-flovv^ 
ers, whose beauty and scent appeared alien to 
the gloom around; but, amidst desolation and 
horror, Nature loves to place the lovely and 
excellent, that man, viewing the scene, may not 
forget that she, the Mother, dwells every where, 
I'he trees were covered with ivy, many of tliem 
hollow and de<:aying, while around them the 
new sprouts arose, and refreshed the eye with 
an appearance of youth. On a stone near the 
cabin door sat the wntch ; she was very old ; 
none knew how old : men, verging on decre- 
pitude, remembered their childish fears of her; 
and they all agreed that formerly she appeared 
more aged and decrepid than now. She was 
bent nearly double ; there was no flesh on hef 
bones ; and the brown and wrinkled skin hung 
loosely about her cheeks and arms. She was 



Ch. r.] VALPERGA. 3 

slioit, thin and small ; her hair was perfectly 
white, and her red eyes, the only part about 
her that appeared to have hfe, glared within 
their sunken sockets ; her voice was cracked 
and shrill. 

" Well, son," said she, when she saw Bindo 
arrive, " What news ? Are thine, or my pre- 
dictions most true ? " 

Bindo threw himself on the ground, and tore 
his hair with rage, but he answered not a word* 

" You would not believe my words," con- 
tinued she, with a malicious laugh ; " but the 
stars are not truer to dieir course, than 1 to 
fate; tomorrow not one stone will lie upon 
another of the castle of Valperga." 

" This must not be/' cried Bindo, starting 
up furiously ; " it shall not be ! Are you not 
a witch? and if you have sold your soul to the 
devil, will he not obey your willr" 

" [ sold my soul to the devil ! " she replied in 
a tone, which bordered on a scream ; " I tell 
thee, thou wert happy, if thy soul were as cer- 
tain to be saved as mine. I rule the spirits, 
aiid do not serve them ; what can angels do 
B 2 



4 VALPEROA. [Ch. I. 

more: But one thing 1 cannot do; 1 cmnot 

impede the star of Castruccio : that must rise/' 

" Aye, — you are all ahke ; — you can lame 

cattle, strangle fowls, and milk cows ; but, 

when power is wanted, you are as weak as 

this straw. Come, if you are a witch, act as 

one." 

" What would you that I should do ? I can 

cover the sky with clouds ; I can conjure rain 
and thunder from the blue empyrean ; the 
Serchio will obey me ; the winds from the 
north and the south know my call ; the mines 
of the earth are subject to me ; I can call the 
dead from their graves, and command the spi- 
rits of air to obey me. The fortunes of men 
are known to me ; but man himself is not to 
be ruled, unless he consent to obey. Castruc- 
cio is set above men ; his star is highest in the 
sky, and the aspect of the vast heaven favours 
him ; I can do nothing with him.'' 

" Then farewel ; and may the curses of hell 
cling to yoU; and blight you! I want no con- 
juror's tricks, — but man shall <io for me what 
the devil cannot," 



Ch. I.] VA LP ERG A. 5 

" Stay, son,** cried the witch ; " now you 
say right; now you are reasonable. Though 
the star of Castruccio be high, it will fall at 
l.ast> burst and fall like a dead stick Upon the 
ground. Be it for us to hasten this moment; 
man may help you, and be that your task; 
watch all that happens, and tell me all; let no 
act or word escape your notice ; and some- 
thing will happen which 1 may wind to my 
purpose. We have both vowed to pursue the 
prince of Lucca to the death. There are no 
means now; but some will arise, and we shall 
triumph. Keep in mind one thing; do not let 
your mistress depart. I know that she desires 
to go to Florence ; she must remain at Lucca, 
until the destined time be fulfilled ; be it your 
task to keep her.'^ 

" I do not like these slow measures,'' replied 
the Albinois sullenly ; " and, methinks, his 
waxen image at the fire, or his heart stuck full 
of pins, might soon rid the earth of him; surely 
if curses might kill a man, he were dead ; tell 
me in truth is he not a fiend ? Is he not one 
of the spirits of the damned housed in flesh to 
torment usf 



6 VALPERGA. [Ch. 1. 

*' Seek not to enquire into the mysteries of 
our art. You tell your wishes; I direct their 
accomplishment; — obey — you can do no more. 
When death, the mower, is in the field, few 
plants are tough enough to turn the edg-e of his 
scythe : yet Castruccio is one of these few ; 
and patience and prudence alone can effect his 
fall. Watch every thing; report all to me; 
and beware that the countess leaves not 
Lucca; our power is gone, when she goes." 

Such was the scene that nnmediatety fol- 
lowed the destruction of the castle of Val- 
j)erga. Bindo had hitherto loved his mistress, 
with an affection whose energy had never been 
called into action; but he loved her, as the 
lioness in the desert loves her whelps, who day 
]>y day feeds them in peace, but, .vhen aroused 
by the hunters, will defend them to the last 
drop of her blood. He loved her, as we all 
love, and know not how fervently, until events 
awake our love to the expression of its energy. 
He had seldom thought upon Castruccio ; 
when he came frequently to Valperga, and he 
saw his mistress happy in his visits, then these 
visits also made the Albinois joyful ; yet he 



Ch, I.] VALPERGA. 7 

sympathized too little in the course of daily 
life, to disapprove of him when he came no 
more ; but, when he sought to injure the sole 
being whom Bindo loved and reverenced, then 
a hidden spring suddenly burst forth in the 
Albinois' mind ; and hate, till then unknown, 
arose, and filled every conduit of his heart, 
and, mingling its gall with the waters of love, 
became the first feeling, the prime mover in his 
soul. 

He had long associated with this witch. 
He felt his defects in bodily prowess ; perhaps 
also he felt the weakness of his reason ; and 
therefore he sought for powers of art, which 
might overcome strength, and powers of mind, 
which were denied to the majority of the hu- 
man species. Bindo was a very favourable 
subject for the witch to act upon ; she deceiv- 
ed him easily, and through his means spread 
far the fame of her incantations. What made 
these women pretend to powers they did not 
possess, incur the greatest perils for the sake of 
being believed to be what they were not, with- 
out any apparent advantage accruing to them- 
selves from this belief? 1 believe we may find 



S VALPERGA. [Ch. I. 

the answer in our own hearts: the love of 
power is inherent in human nature; and, in 
evil natures, to be feared is a kind of power. 
The witch of the Lucchese forest was much 
feared ; and no one contributed to the spread 
of this feehng more than Bindo, 

She had no interest to preserve Eatlianasia, 
or to destroy Castruccio ; but she must feign 
these feehngs in order to preserve her power 
over the Albinois. She resoh^ed hov^ever not 
to be drawn into any action which might at- 
tract the hatred of the prince ; for she knew 
him indeed to be a man out of her sphere, a 
n)an who went to mass, and told his beads as 
the church directed him, and who would have 
no hesitation in consigning to what he would 
call, condign punishment, all such as dealt 
with evil spirits, infernal drug?, and diabolisal 
craft. 

Bindo saw nothing of the motives which 
actuated her ; and he really believed that the 
star of Castruccio had the ascendant : so after 
the fn^st ebullitions of despair were calmed, he 
waited, witii the patience of cherished hate, 
for tiie events which the witch told him might 



Ch. I.] VALPERGA. g 

in the course of time bring about the sequel 
he so much desired. 

He had made calculations, and cast lots 
upon the fate of Valperga, whose results were 
contrary to the enunciations of the witch. 
These had proved false ; and, when time had 
calmed his feelings, this disappointment itself 
made him cling more readily to the distant, 
but as he hoped, surer promises of the witch, 
and build upon her words the certain expec- 
tation of the overthrow of Castruccio, and the 
restoration of Valperga in more than its origi- 
nal splendour. He returned to Euthanasia, 
and watched by her sick chamber, as the sa- 
vage mother of a wild brood tends upon her. 
expiring young ; the fear of losing her by this 
sickness, at once exasperated him against the 
man whom he beheved to be the cause of the 
mischief, and by the mightiness of his fear 
filled him with that calm which is the con- 
summation of wretchedness. He neither ate 
nor slept; his existence appeared a miracle. 
But his mistress recovered ; and bis exhausted 
frame was now as much shaken with joy, as 
before with grief; yet, pale, emaciated,. trenit- 
B 5 



10 VALPERGA. [Ch. T. 

bling as it were on the edge of life, but still 
living, he survived all these changes. 

The summer advanced ; and still Euthana- 
sia remained at Lucca. A number of slight 
circumstances caused this : her health was 
yet weak ; and her pale cheek and beamless 
eye shewed that life hardly sat firm upon his 
throne within her frame ; they were menaced 
with a peculiarly hot season, and it was scarcely 
judged right that she should expose herself to 
the excessive heat of a Florentine summer. 
Lauretta also, her cousin, promised to acco»n- 
pany her, if she would delay her journey until 
autumn ; so she consented to remain, although 
in truth she felt Lucca to be to her as a 
narrow prison, and cherished the hope of 
finding healthful feelings, and some slight re- 
turn of happiness, at Florence, Yet the joy- 
less state which was now her portion, was one 
reason why she cared not to change; it bred 
within her an indolence of feeling, that loved 
to feed upon old cares, rather tlian upon new 
hopes. A sense of duty, rather than any other 
sentiment, made her wish to remove ; she be- 
lieved, that she owed it to herself to revive 



Ch. I.] VALPERGA. 11 

from the kind of moral death she had endured, 
and to begin as it were a fresh hfe with new 
expectations. But we are all such creatures 
of habit, that we cling rather to sorrows which 
have been our companions of old, than to a 
new-sprung race of pleasures, whose very names 
perhaps are unknown to us. 

Euthanasia loved to sit in the desolate gar- 
den of her palace, and to moralize in her own 
mind, when she saw a tender rose embraced 
and choked by evil weeds that grew in strength 
about it; or sometimes to visit the tower of 
her palace, and to look towards the rock where 
the castle of Valperga had once stood, now a 
heap of ruins. Could she endure to look 
upon the formless mass which had before con- 
stituted her shelter and home ? where had 
stood the hall within whose atmosphere she 
had grown to womanhood ; where she had 
experienced all the joys that her imaginatnon 
kind heart (storehouses of countless treasure) 
could bestow ? Yet that was all gone, and she 
must begin life anew : she prayed for her fa- 
tiier's spirit to inspire her with courage ; but 
her mind was too subtle and dehcate in its 



12 VALPERGA. [Ch. i. 

feelings, to forget its antieiit attachments. 
There are some souls, bright and precious, 
which, like gold and silver, may be subdued 
by the fiery trial, and yield to new moulds ; 
but there are others, pure and solid as the dia- 
mond, which may be shivered to pieces, yet in 
every fragment retain their indelible characte- 
ristics. 

" I can never change," she thought, " never 
become other than I am. And yet I am told 
that this obstinate sorrow is weakness, and that 
the wise and good, like strong plants, shoot up 
with fresh vigour, when cut down even to the 
root. It may be so ; and so it may perhaps 
be with me : but as yet I feel all dead, ex- 
cept pain, and that dwells for ever within me. 
Alas ! life, and the little it contains, is not 
worth the misery I endure; its best joys are 
fleeting shadows ; its griefs ought to be the 
same; and those are true philosophers, who- 
trample on both, and seek in the grave for a 
wisdom and happiness, which life cannot bring 
us. 

" Why was I born to feel sorrow ? Why 
do I not die, that pain may expire with me ? 



Ch. l.J VALPERGA. 13 

And yet I now speak as a presumptuous ca- 
viller, unread in the lessons of the wise, and 
who vainly blunders over and misquotes their 
best learning. Life has more in it than we 
think ; it is all that we have, all that we know. 

" Life is all our knowledge, and our higliest 
praise is to have lived well. If we had never 
lived, we should know nothing of earth, or sky, 
or God, or man, or delight, or sorrow. When 
our Creator bestowed on us this gift, he gave 
us that which is beyond all words precious ; 
for without it our apparent forms would have 
been a blind atom in the mass, our souls would 
never have been. We live ; and we learn all 
that is good, and see all that is beautiful ; our 
will is called into action, our minds expand 
like flowers, till, overworn, they fade; if we 
did not hve, we should know nothing of all 
this ; and if we do not live well, we reap sor- 
row alone. 

<* What do we know of heroes and sages, 
but that they lived ? Let us not spurn there- 
fore this sum and summit of our knowledge, 
but, cherishing it, make it so appear that we 
value, and in some degree deserve, the gift of 



14 VALPKRGA. [Ch. I. 

life, and the many wonders that accompany 
it." 

Euthanasia suffered much during the sum- 
mer months ; and all that she heard of Cas- 
truccio turned the fount of wholesome tears to 
drops of agony. He had in truth become a 
tyrant. He did not slay his thousands like 
Ezzelin of Padua ; but he had received the 
graft of vain-glory into his soul, and he now 
bore the fruits. He put to death remorseless- 
ly those whom he suspected, and would even 
use torture, either to discover other victirns, 
or to satisfy his desire of revenge. Several cir- 
cumstances of this kind happened during this 
summer, which made Euthanasia more mi- 
serable than words or tears could express. If 
she saw his enemies, they uttered deep curses 
on his cruelty ; if she saw those who had for- 
merly been his friends, their talk was filled with 
bitter sarcasms on his ingratitude, and careless 
coldness of heart. That heart had once been 
the garden of virtue, where all good qualities 
sprung up and flourished, like odorous and de- 
licately painted flowers; but now ambition 
had become its gardener, and the weed-over- 



Ch. I.] VALPERGA. 15 

grown inclosure of Euthanasia's palace was 
but a slight symbol of all of cruel and treache- 
rous that sprung up there, which allowed no 
rose to blow, and hid the blooms of the jessa- 
mine in the coarse and broad leaves of wordi- 
less brambles. Sometimes she thanked Pro- 
vidence that she had not become the wife of 
this man : but it was a bitter thankfulness. She 
had not been wedded to him by the church's 
rites ; but her soul,Jier thoughts, her fate, had 
been married to his ; she tried to loosen the 
chain diat bound them eternally together, and 
feit that the effort was fruitless : if he were 
evil, she must weep; if liis light-hearted self- 
ishness allowed no room for remorse in his 
own breast, humiliation and sorrow was doubly 
her portion, and this was her destiny for ever. 

His military exploits of this year rather con- 
sisted in tlie slow laying of foundation-stones, 
than were distinguished by any pscuhar glory. 
The Florentine army retreated in trepidation 
before him ; he took several castles, made se- 
veral new alliances, and consolidated more and 
more the power which he hoped one day to 
pat to a mighty purpose. Desire of dominion 



16 VALPERGA. [Ch. I. 

and lordship was the only passion that now 
had much power in his soul ; he had forgotten 
Euthanasia; or If he remembered her, he called 
her a peevish girl, and wasted no further thought 
upon her. 

The summer had been tremendously hot ; 
and all the fields were parched, and the earth 
])akcd and cracked from the long drouth. These 
were all signs of a wet autumn ; and hardly 
had Euthanasia determined on her journey to 
Florence, before it was stopped by tremendous 
rains and tempests, that deluged the earth, and 
disturbed the sky. The lightning became as 
a shaft in the hands of an experienced warrior ; 
so true it seemed to its aim, and destroying so 
many with its subtle fire : and the thunder^ 
reverberating along the hills, sent up to heaven 
the shout, which proclaimed the triumph and 
desolation of its precursor. Then came the 
rain ; and the earth gladly received these to- 
kens of heaved's love, which blessed her vnih 
fertility. The torrents roared doAvn the hills ;,. 
and the rivers, no longer restrained within their 
banks, rose, and deluged the plain, filling even, 
the streets of Lucca with water. 



Chvl.] VALPERGA. 17 

Bindo looked on all this labour of the ele- 
ments with a mind hovering between pleasure 
and fear. He believed that the witch of the 
forest had caused this inundation, to impede 
the journey of the countess ; but, thinking thus, 
he trembled at the power she possessed, and 
at the strange company of unseen spirits, which 
thus, unknown to mortals, interfere with their 
destinies. The devil, he knew, was called 
prince of the air; but there is a wide diffe- 
rence between our behef of an hearsay, and the 
proof which he now thought was presented to 
him. When he repaired at the mysterious 
hour of midnight to a running stream, and saw, 
as the witch uttered her incantations, and lash- 
ed the waters with her rod, — that a tempes- 
tuous wind arose from the south, and the dark 
clouds among which the hghtnings played, ad- 
vanced over their heads, and then the rain in 
quick big drops, accompanied by hail, fell on 
the earth ; — when he saw this, his limbs trem- 
bled, his heart beat quick with fear ; he dared 
not cross himself, nox vawiiex di pater-noster ; 
and, if love and hate had not possessed him so 
entirely, he would never have ventured again 
to vvitne^is the o^agical powers of liis friend. 



18 VALPERGA. [Ch.l. 

A cold and early winter followed the flood, 
and froze the waters before they retreated from 
the inundated fields. For many years so ter- 
rible a season had not been known in Italy ; 
and, in the Lucchese states particularly, it oc- 
casioned a great loss of fruit-trees and vines. 
The mountains w^ere covered with snow ; the 
torrents were arrested in their course by the 
subtle nets which winter cast over them ; it 
•was a strange sight for an Itahan to see. " And 
this," thought Euthansia, " is what the Trans- 
al pines mean, when they talk of the fearful 
cold of winter. Oh ! indeed, no hunter is like 
him, when he comes down from the north, 
bringing frost, his bride, along with him ; he 
hunts the leaves from the trees, and destroys 
the animals which inhabit the earth, even in 
their holds and fastnesses. He casts bonds 
upon the rivers and streams ; and even the 
* sapless foliage of the ocean,' and the mighty 
monsters and numberless spawn that rove 
through its wastes, are all subdued by his fierce 
and resistless ravages/' 

Thus she thought, as she saw the country, 
late so beautiful, the Earth, lovely as a young 
mother nursing her only care, now as wild and 



Ch. I.] VALPEKGA. IQ 

forlorn as that mother if she be ruthlessly be- 
reft of her infant. The fields were hardened 
by frost; and the ilood lay moveless and white 
over the plain ; the hills were covered with 
snow. It was a grievous change from the 
smiles of summer; but it did not last long; 
and thaw quickly reversed tlie scene. The 
earth was again alive ; and the rivers and floods 
again filled the air with sound. Euthanasia 
resolved to wait only until the season should 
be somewhat more advanced, to make her long 
delayed journey to Floience. 



'20 VAIPEUGA. [Ch. II. 



CHAPTER II. 

I 

jBeairke in the Inqiimtion at Lucca, — Freed- 
by Castruccioy at the Liter cession of Eutha- 
nasia, 

While Euthanasia yet remained at Liicca^ 
in this uncertain manner, a circumstance oc- 
curred which caused lier to suspend the pre- 
parations for her journey. Late one night (it 
was nearly twelve oViock), the visitof a stranger 
was announced ; a man, they said, so wrapt 
up in his capuchin, that his physiognomy 
could not be distinguished. Why did Eutha- 
nasia's heart beat fast, and the colour desert 
her warm lips ? What could she hope or fear ? 
The man was admitted, and one glance sufificed 
to satisfy her curiosity, and to quiet her trem- 
bling expectation. He was one of the meaner 
classy and,, when he threw back his cloak. 
Euthanasia perceived tiiat he was an entire 



€h.II.] VALPEIiGA, ^i 

stranger to her ; but there was a khidness, a 
rough sensibiUty in his face, that pleased her, 
and she gently enquired what he had to say 
Xo her. 

" Noble countess, I come on a work of cha- 
rity, which would ruin me for ever if my su- 
periors were to discover it. 1 am the jailor of 
the Lucchese prison ; and this morning the 
Dominican inquisitors put under ray custody 
a Paterin woman % whom it would move any 
soul but theirs to behold. She has touched 
me with the greatest pity by her tears and 
heart-breaking intreaties: she denies her he- 
resy, and says that you can prove her faith ; 
but she must see you first ; and I, at peril of 
all that 1 am worth, am come to conduct you 
to her dungeon, for I can admit you only by 
night. Surely you will come ; poor thing, she 
is very young and fearful, and is now lying on 

* These heretics were long a principal subject oi' 
hostility to the Inquisition; and in 1290 a particulur 
commtinity was erected at Florence hy San Pictro d\ 
Verona, for the express purpose of their exttnxiiaa- 
tion. 



22 VALPERGA. [Ch. 11. 

the floor of her prison panting with terror and 
expectation." 

" Unfortunate creature ! Did she tell you her 
name r *' 

" She says that you do not know it; but she 
intreats you to remember a pilgrim girl, whom 
you once received at your castle, and whom 
you pitied ; a sun-burnt, way-worn creature 
who said that she was on the way to Rome." 

" 1 do not recollect; but if she is unhappy, 
and desires to see me, it is enough, 1 follow 

you." 

Euthanasia wrapt her capuchin around her, 
and followed the man through the dark, wet 
streets of Lucca : the thaw had not yet com- 
pleted its work ; the snow was deep and miry 
under their feet; while the melting collections 
of several days drip[)ed, or rather streamed 
from the house- roofs on their l>eads : the Li- 
beccio blew a warm, cloud-bringing wind, 
that made the night so black, that they could 
not avoid the standing pools that interspersed 
the streets. At length they arrived at the pri- 
son ; the jailor entered by a small, low door 
which he carefully closed after them, and then 



Gh.II.] VALPERGA. eS 

struck a light. He led Euthanasia through 
the bare and mildewed vaults, sometimes un- 
locking a massy gate, drawing back the harsh 
bolts which grated with rust and damp ; some- 
times they emerged into a passage open to the 
sky, but narrow, with tall black walls about it, 
which dropt their melted snow with a conti- 
nual and sullen splash upon tlie pavement : 
small, glassless, grated windows looked into 
these strait passages ; these were the holes that 
admitted light into the dungeons. At length 
they ascended a small, broken, staircase of 
wood ; and, opening a door at tiie head of it, 
and consigning his lamp to the countess, the 
jailor said : " She is here ; comfort her ; in 
two hours I shall come to conduct you back." 

Euthanasia entered tlie prison-chamber, awe- 
stricken and trembling ; for the good ever feel 
humiliated at the sight of misfortune in others : 
the poor prisoner was seated crouched in a 
comer ; she looked wildly towards the door ; 
and, seeing Euthanasia, she leaped up, and, 
throwing herself at her feet, clinging to her 
kiiees, and clasping them with convulsive 



r 



M VALPERGA. [Ch. II. 

Strength, she cried, " Save me ! You alone on 
earth can save me." 

Poor Euthanasia was moved to tears ; she 
raised the sufferer, and, taking her in her arms, 
tried to soothe her : the prisoner only sobbed, 
leaning her head upon Euthanasia's hand : 
^' Fear not, you shall be saved ; poor sufferer, 
calm yourself; speak, what would you with 
me ? fear not, no harm shall reach you ; 1 will 
be your friend." 

" Will you indeed— indeed— be my friend ? 
and go to him, and bid him save me? He 
alone can do it." 

"Who? Speak calmly, dearest; pause 
awhile; reassure yourself, and then speak. 
Look, you are safe in my arms; I clasp them 
round you, do not fear ! '* 

The prisoner sunk in Euthanasia's embrace : 
she was chilled, icy-cold ; — and she lay pant- 
ing, as a bleeding fawn who gazes on its death's 
wound. The warmth of Euthanasia's arms 
somewhat restored her; and she said, dividing 
the entangled strings of her hair with her thin 
fingers; " You do 0ot remember me,^nor 



* 



Ch. II.] VALPERGA. £5 

would he ; I am as unlike what I was when 
he saw me, as is the yellow, fallen leaf to the 
bright-green foliage of May. You do not re- 
member me ? " 
" Yes, now it flashes on my memory ; are you 

then indeed '' Euthanasia paused; the 

name of Beatrice hovered on her lips, but a feel- 
ing of delicacy prevented her from speaking it : 
she continued ; " Yes, I recollect the pilgrim, 
your refusal to remain at Valperga, and the 
deep interest I took in your sorrows." 

'^ You were very, very kind ; are you not 
so now ? Will you not go to him, and ask 
him to order my release ? " 

*^ To whom am I to go ? and from whom 
do I come?" asked Euthanasia, half-smihng; 
for, notwithstanding the prisoner recalled to 
her memory a scene, which made it appear 
that she was certainly Beatrice ; yet so long 
had all trace of her been lost, that she wished 
for some confirmation from her own lips. 

" Alas ! " replied the unhappy girl, " 1 would 
not have him know, if I could help it. Do you 
think that, if you were to tell him that a poor 
girl, who five years ago had just attained her 

VOL. III. C 



26 VALPERGA. [Ch. II. 

seventeenth year, who w^is then happy, loving 
and adored, — who is now pursued for heresy 
—falsely — or if you will— -truly ; one very un- 
fortunate, who earnestly implores him as he 
*oves his own soul, to save her; do you not 
think he would compassionate me ? " 

*^ Who ? you speak in riddles." 

" In riddles ! Are you not Euthanasia ? You 
must know whom I mean ; why, AntelminelH, 
— Castruccio." 

The prisoner hid her face with her hands. 
She blushed deepl}', and her fast-falling tears 
trickled through her fingers ; Euthanasia blush- 
ed also, a tremulous hectic, that quickly va- 
nished, while her companion's cheeks still 
burned. 

" Yes, I will go to him, or to any one on 
earth to save you. — Yet methinks T had better 
go to the father-inquisitors; I am known to 
them, and I think 1 could as easily move them 
as the prince ; he is careless—" 

" Oh ! no — no ; you must go to him : he 
knew me once, and surely would compassion- 
ate me. Try liim first with the echo of my 
complaints, and a relation of my tears ; surely 



4 



Ch. 11.] VALPEllGA. £7 

his eyes, which can look into the soul, would 
then be dimmed : would they not ? " 

Euthanasia thought of Leodino; and she 
was about to reply, that warriors, politicians, 
and ambitious princes, such as Castruccio, 
were accustomed to regard with contempt 
woes like hers. But she hesitated ; she would 
not rob him, whom she had once loved, of the 
smallest mite of another's praise, however un- 
deserved ; besides, she felt that the name of 
Beatrice alone would move him to compas- 
sion, perhaps to remorse. She was therefore 
silent ; and the prisoner continued, with a voice 
of trembling earnestness, " Try every argument 
first ; but, if he is obdurate, then tell him that 
he once knew me, — that now my fortunes are 
chstnged, — he will guess the cause : yet per- 
haps he will think wrong, for that is not the 
cause. Tell him I am one Beatrice ; — he saw 
me some years ago at the house of the good 
bishop of Ferrara." 

The poor fallen prophetess now burst into 

a passion of weeping ; she wrung her hands, 

and tore her hair, while her companion looked 

on her, unable to restrain her tears. Castruc- 

C2 



?8 VALPERftA. [Ch. ir. 

cio had described his Beatrice, so bright, so 
ethereal in her loveliness, that it moved Eu- 
thanasia's inmost soul to see what a change 
a very few years had made. Perceiving the 
blushes and shame of the lost girl, she conceal- 
ed her knowledge of her tale, and answered 
only by endeavouring to soothe her, and to 
as#ure her of her safety. 

" Am I safe ? I tell you that I fear, oh ! how 
much I fear ! I am very young ; I was once 
happy ; but, since that, I have suffered beyond 
human utterance; yet I dread death; and, 
more than all, do 1 fear pain. They call me 
a heretic ; aye," (and her dark eyes beamed 
fiercely) " I am one ; I do not belong to their 
maudlin creed ; I feel my wrongs, and I dare 
curse— — But, hush, not so loud.— You par- 
don me, do you not ? Alas ! if you turn against 
me, they seize on me, tear me, bum me ! " 

Tiie two hours had swiftly passed, while Bea- 
trice thus wept with alternate passion. The 
jailor came to reconduct Euthanasia ; but Bea- 
trire clung to her, clasping lier neck, and in- 
twiuing her fingers in her long thick hair. 
^^ No! no! You must not go!" she cried; 



Ch. II.] VALPERGA. £9 

*^ I shall die, if I am again left alone. Oh ! 
before you came, I sometimes felt as if I did 
not know where I was, and madness seemed 
about to fall on me : you are good, consolato- 
ry, kind ; you must not leave me/' 

** Then I cannot see the prince ,* I cannot 
intercede for your liberation." 

" But that is many hours hence, and the 
comfortable day-Ught will be come ; now it is 
quite dark ; hark to the splashing water, and 
the howling of the Li beccio ; I had forgotten 
all that; and now they come upon me with ten- 
fold horror ; do not leave me i " 

Euthanasia could hardly distinguish the sup- 
pliant's features by the light of the jailor's small 
lamp; but she saw her eyes bright with tears, 
and felt her bosom throb against her own ; 
again she strove to console her ; reason was 
thrown away ; — w^hen the jailor urged his, her 
own, every one's safety — she shook her head. 

" I thought you were kind ; but you ar$ 
not : my cheeks are pale with fear ; put up 
your lamp to them that you may see. She 
can go early, the moment day dawns,— indeed 
she shall go tlien^ but now she must not." 



50 VALPEllGA. eii.II.] 

Euthanasia tore herself away ; though her 
heart was pierced by the wild shriek of Bea- 
trice, as she threw herself on the floor. The 
jailor led her through the melancholy passages 
of the prison, and then along the wet streets, 
until she reached her home : and she retired to 
meditate during the remaining hours of night 
on the words she should employ in her repre- 
sentations to Castruccio the following morning. 

The expectation of this meeting flushed her 
cheeks, and made her deep eyes beam, while 
every limb trembled. She had not seen him 
so long that his assumed power, his tyrannies, 
and mean politics, were lost in lier recollec- 
tion ; she felt as if she should again see him 
honest, passion-breathing, and beautiful, as 
when they took sweet counsel together at Val- 
perga. Valperga ! that was now a black and 
hideous ruin, and he the author of its destruc- 
tion. But she thought, " This is a dream ; — 
1 shall see him, and it will vanish ; there is a 
coil wound round me of sorrow and distrust, 
which will snap beneath his smile, and free 
me, — 1 shall see him ! 

« Why do r think of myself? I go to free 



Ch. II.] VAX-PERGA. 31 

this poor girl, whom hp has wronged, and to 
whom he belongs far more than to me ; this 
unhappy Beatrice, who sheds tears of agony 
in her dungeon. I am nothing ; I go as no- 
thing ; would that he should not recognize me ! 
I go a suppliant for another, and I must tame 
my looks : they are not proud ; but I must 
teach them humility ; I must school my heart 
not to speak, not to think of itself — I go for 
her ; and, having obtained my request, I will 
come away, forgetful that I am any thing." 

Day dawned ; day, cold, wet, and cloudy, 
but ever cheerful to one weighed down by the 
sense of darkness and inaction : day did not 
dawn this dreary winter morning, until seven 
o'clock, and the period had arrived when it 
was fitting that Euthanasia should seek Cas- 
truccio. She threw a veil over her shining 
hair, while she hid her form in a rich cloak of 
sables ; then she stole out alone ; for she could 
not endure that any one should know of this 
strange visit. When she arrived at the Ptf- 
lazzo del Govenio, her rich attire and distin- 
guished mien won her easy entrance, and she 
penetrated to the cabinet of the prince. 



3^2 VALPERGA. [Ch. tl. 

Her heart beat audibly; she had entered 
with rapid, though hght steps ; now she paus- 
ed ; and, as it were gathering up the stragghng 
feehngs of her mind, she endeavoured to bind 
them in a firm knot ; she resolved to cahn her- 
self, to still the convulsive motion of her lips, 
to remember nothing but Beatrice. She en- 
tered ; Antelminelli was alone ; he was at a 
table reading a paper, and a smile of hght de- 
rision played upon his features ; he raised on 
her his dark, piercing eyes, and seeing a lady 
before him, he rose ; in a moment Euthanasia 
was self-possessed and resolved; and casting 
back her cloak, and throwing aside her veil, her 
eyes lifted up, yet not fixed on him, she began in 
her silver voice to say, " My lord, I come— "^ 

But he was too much thunderstruck to lis- 
ten ; his cheeks glowed with pleasure ; all the 
anger and indifference he had nourished va- 
nished in her presence, and he broke forth in 
a torrent of wonder and thanks* 

She waved her hand, — " Do not thank me, 
but listen ; for I come on a message, an errand 
of charity ; and if you can, hear me, and forget 
who it is that speaks." 



Ch. II.] VALPERGA. 35 

He smiled, and replied : " Certainly it were 
easy not to see the sun when it shines : but, 
whatever your errand may be, speak it not 
yet ; — if you come to make a request, I shall 
grant it instantly, and then you will go ; but 
pause awhile first, that I may look on you ; it 
is a whole year since I saw you last ; you are 
changed, you are paler, — your eyes — but you 
turn away from me, as if you were angry." 

" I am not angry — but 1 am nothing.— 
There is a heretic^ at least a girl accused of 
heresy, confined in your prisons, whom I wish 
you to free, and, for the love of Heaven, not 
by the shortest delay to add another moment of 
sorrow to her heap : she has suffered much.'' 

" A heretic ! that is beyond my jurisdiction ; 
I do not meddle with religion." 
.^" Yes, you do; — you see priests every day : 
|)j^t I intreat you not to oblige me to argue 
with you ; listen to me a few moments, and I 
shall say no more. She is very unfortunate, 
and fears death and pain with a horror that 
almost deprives her of reason; she is young; 
and it is piteous to see one scarcely more than 
twenty years of age, under the fangs of these 
Co 



S4 VAXPERGA. {Cli. IX. 

bloodhounds ; she was once happy ; alas ! pity 
her, since she feeis to the very centre of her 
heart the change from joy to grief." 

" Yet no harm will happen to her, at most a 
few months' imprisonment : if she dread death 
and pain, she will of course recant and be 
freed ; what will she suffer for so short a 
time r " 

" Fear ; the worst of evils, far worse than 
death. I would fain persuade you to throw 
aside this hard-heartedness, which is not na- 
tural to you ; moments are years, if they are 
lengthened out by pain ; every minute that she 
lives in her dungeon is to her a living death of 
agony ; but I will tell you .her name, — at her 
request I wished to conceal it : but that will 
win you, if you are not already won by the 
sweet hope of saving one who sufiers torments 
you can never know." 

" Euthanasia, do not look so gloomily ; I am 
not thinking of your heretic; 1 hesitate, that I 
may keep you here : you have your will ; 1 will 
never refuse a request of yours." 

A smile of fleeting disdain passed over her 
countenance, " Nay, when you know who 



Ch.II.] VALPERGA. 35 

she is, you may grant my prayer for her own 
sake. I come from Beatrice, the daughter of 
Wilhelmina of Bohemia/' 

If the ghost of the poor prophetess had sud- 
denly arisen, it could not have astounded Cas- 
truccio more, than to hear her name thus 
spoken by Euthanasia, coupled with the ap- 
pellations of heretic and prisoner. The tide 
of his life ebbed ; and, when it flowed again, 
he thought of the celestial Beatrice, her light 
step, her almost glorious presence; and the 
memory of her pale cheek and white lips when 
he last saw her, thrilled his heart. Years had 
passed since then ; what had she suffered ? 
What was she ? A heretic ? Ala^ ! she was 
the daughter of Wilhelmina, the nursling of 
Magfreda, the ward of a leper, the adopted 
child of the good bishop of Ferrara. 

Euthanasia saw the great confluence of pas- 
sions, which agitated Castruccio, and made 
him alternately pale and red ; she was silent, 
her quiet eyes beaming upon him in com- 
passion ; for a long time his heart could not 
find a voice, but at length he spoke, — ^^ Hasten ! 
hasten ! free her, take her to you ! Euthana- 



36 VALPERGA. [Ch. IT. 

81 a, you are the angel itself of charity ; you 
know all her sad story — all that relates to me-^ 
calm her, console her, make her herself again, 
—poor, poor Beatrice ! " 

*' Farewell then ; I go, — send one of your 
officers with the order; I will hasten to her^ as 
quickly as you can wish.'* 

'^ Yet pause, stay one moment; shall I never 
see you again? You have cast me off utterly; 
yet, I pray you, be happy. Why should you be 
pale and sorrowful ? you have other friends ; 
must all that love me, mourn ? Surely I am 
not a devil, that all I touch must wither. 
Beware ! tear the veil from your heart ; read, 
read its inmost secrets, the eternal words im- 
printed in its core; you do not despise me, you 
love me,— be mine.*' 

The pale cheek of Euthanasia was flushed, 
her eyes flashed fire, — " Never ! tie myself to 
tyranny, to slavery, to war, to deceit, to hate ? 
1 tell thee I am as free as air. But I am hur- 
ried far beyond the bounds I prescribed for 
iny>:elf, and now not a word more." 

"Yes, one word more; not of yourself, wild 
enthusiast, but of Beatrice. I destroyed her ; 
not that I knew what I did; but heedlessly, 



Ch. 11.] VALPERGAi 3? 

foolishly, destroyed her ; do you then repair 
my work ; 1 would give half my soul that she 
should be as when I first saw her. You have 
heard a part of her story, and you will now 
perhaps learn those sufferings which she has 
endured since we parted ; it is doubtless a 
strange and miserable tale ; but do you be the 
. ministering angel of mercy and love to her/* 

Sorrow and even humiliation were marked 
on Castruccio's countenance ; Euthanasia 
looked at it, almost for the first time since she 
had entered; she sighed softly, and said nearly 
in a whisper, "Alas ! that you should no longer 
be what you once were ! " 

Pride now returned and swelled every fea- 
ture of Castruccio ; " Enough, enough : what- 
ever wine of life I drain, I mingled it myself. 
Euthanasia, if we never meet again, remember, 
1 am content ; can you be more ? ''^ 

Euthanasia said not a word ; she vanished, 
her bright presence was gone; and Castruccio, 
to whom, as to the fallen arch-angel, that line 
might be appUed, 

Vaunting aloud, though rack'd with deep despair^ 



i3B VALPERGA. [Ch. 11. 

tearless, his lips pressed together, sat recalling 
to mind her words and looks, until, remem- 
bering his boast, he looked up with angry 
defiance ; and, shaking from his heart the dew 
of tenderness he plunged amidst the crowd 
w^here he commanded, where his very eye was 
obeyed. 

Euthanasia hastened to the prison, where 
the kind-hearted jailor led her with a face of 
joyful triumph to the dungeon of Beatrice; 
the poor thing was sleeping, the traces of tears 
were on her cheeks (for like a child she had 
cried herself to sleep), and several times she 
started uneasily. Euthanasia made a sign to 
the jailor to be silent, and knelt down beside 
her, looking at her countenance, once so glo- 
riously beautiful ; the exquisite carving of her 
well shaped eyelids, her oval face, and pointed 
chin still shewed signs of what she had been ; 
the rest was lost. Her complexion w^as sun- 
burnt, her hands very thin and yellow, and care 
had already marked her sunken cheeks and 
brow with many lines ; her jet black hair w^as 
mingled with grey ; her long tresses had been 



Cll.Tr.] VALPERGA. S^ 

cut, and now reached only to her neck ; while, 
strait and thin, they were the shadow merely 
of what they had been ; her face, her whole 
person was emaciated, worn and faded. She 
awoke and beheld the eyes of Euthanasia, like 
heaven itself, clear and deep, gazing on her. 
—"Arise, poor sufferer, you are free !" 

Beatrice looked wildly; then, starting up, 
she cla})ped her hands in a transport of joy, 
she threw herself at the feet of her deliverer,, 
she embraced the jailor, she was frantic. 
" Free ! free !" for some time she could repeat 
no other word. At length she said, "Pardon 
me ; yesterday I was rude and selfish ; I tor- 
mented and reproached you, who are all kind- 
ness. And you, excellent man, you will for- 
give me, will you not? What was it that i 
feared? !Now that I am going to leave my 
dungeon, methinks it is a good cell enough, and 
I could stay here always well content; it is^ 
somew^hat dark and cold, but one can wrap- 
oneself up, and shut one's eyes, and fancy 
one's self under the sun of heaven," 

She continued prattling, and would have 



m VALPERGA. [Ch, IJ. 

said much more, but that Euthanasia with 
gentle force drew her from the dungeon, out 
of the gloomy prison ; and they hastened to her 
palace, where Beatrice was quickly refreshed 
by a bath and food. But, when the first joy 
of hberation was passed, she sunk to melan- 
choly ; she would not speak, but sat listlessly, 
and her tears fell in silence. Euthanasia tried 
to comfort her ; but many days passed, during 
which she continued sullen and untractable. 

In the mean time Euthanasia received seve- 
ral billets from Castruccio, with earnest enqui- 
ries concerning the welfare of this poor girl. 
" Gjod knows," he wrote, *^ what has happened 
to this unfortunate being since we parted. 
My heart is agonized, not only for what she 
suffers, but for what she may have suffered. 
She is now, they say, a heretic, a Paterin, one 
who believes in the ascendancy of the evil spi- 
rit in the world ; poor insane girl ! Euthana- 
sia, for her sours sake, and for mine which must 
answer for hers, reason with her, and convert 
her ; be to her as an affectionate sister, an an- 
gel of peace and pardon ► I leave the guidance 



Ch. II.] VALPERGA. 41 

of her future destiny to your judgement : but 
do not lose sight of her. What do I ask of 
you ? And what right have I to bring upon 
you the burthen of my faults ? But you are 
good, and will forgive me/' 



42 VALPERGA. [Cli. III. 



CHAPTER IIL 

Beatrice, he?' Creed, and her Love* 

EUTHAiSTASIA was meditating on this letter, 
when Beatrice entered, and sat down beside 
her. She took her hand, and kissed it, and tlien 
said, " How can you forgive my ingratitude ? I 
am self-willed, sullen, and humorous ; alas ! 
sometimes the memory of the evils I have suf- 
fered presses on me, and I forget all my duties. 
Duties ! until I knew you I had none ; for {i\e 
years my life has been one scene of despair : 
you cannot tell what a fall mine was." 

*^ Forget, I do intreat you, poor sufferer, all 
your past unhappiness ; forget every thing that 
you once were." 

" Aye, you say right ; I must forget every 
thing, or to be what I am must torture me to 
despair. Poor, misled, foolish, insensate Bea- 
trice ! I can accuse myself alone for my many 



Ch. III.] VALPERGA. 43 

ills ; myself, and that power who sits on high, 
and scatters evil like dew upon the earth, a 
killing, blighting honey dew." 

^' Hush ! my poor girl, do not talk thus ; in- 
deed I must not have you utter these senti- 
ments." 

" Oh ! let me speak : before all others I 
must hide my bursting feelings, deep, deep. 
Yet for one moment let me curse ! " 

Beatrice arose; she pointed to heaven; she 
stood in the same attitude, as when she had 
prophesied to the people of Ferrara under the 
portico of the church of St. Anna ; but how 
changed ! Her form thin ; her face care-worn ; 
her love-formed lips withered ; her hands and 
arms, then so rotmd and fair, now wrinkled 
and faded ; her eyes w^ere not the same ; they 
had lost that softness which, mingling with their 
fire, was as something wonderful in brilliancy 
and beauty ; they now, like the sun from be- 
neath a thunder cloud, glared fiercely from un- 
der her dark and scattered hair that shaded her 
brow : but even now, as in those times, she 
spoke with tumultuous eloquence : 

" EuthanasiB, you are much deceived ; you 



44 VALPERGA. [Ch. III. 

eitlier worship a useless shadow, or a fiend in 
the clothing of a god. Listen to me, while I 
announce to you the eternal and victorious in- 
fluence of evil, which circulates like air about 
us, clinging to our flesh like a poisonous gar- 
ment, eating into us, and destroying us. Are 
you blind, that you see it not ? Are you deaf, 
that you hear no groans ? Are you insensible, 
that you feel no misery ? Open your eyes, and 
you will behold all of which I speak, standing 
in hideous array before you. Look around. Is 
there not war, violation of treaties, and hard- 
hearted cruelty ? Look at the societies of men ; 
are not our fellow creatures tormented one by 
the other in an endless circle of pain ? Some 
shut up in iron cages, starved and destroyed ; 
cities float in blood, and the hopes of the hus- 
bandman are manured by his own mangled 
limbs : remember the times of our fathers, the 
extirpation of the Albigenses ; — the cruelties of 
Ezzelin, when troops of the blind, and the 
lame, and the mutilated, the scum of his pri- 
sons, inundated the Italian states. Remember 
the destruction of the templars. Did you never 
glance in thought into the tower of famine of 



Ch. III.] VALPERGA. 45 

Ugolino ; or into the hearts of the armies of 
exiles, that each day the warring citizens ba- 
nish from their homes ? Did you never reflect 
on the guilty policy of the Popes, those minis- 
ters of the reigning king of heaven ? Remember 
the Sicilian vespers ; the death of the innocent 
Conradin ; the myriads whose bones are now 
bleached beneath the sun of Asia : they went 
in honour of His name, and thus He rewards 
them. 

^^Then reflect upon domestic life, on the 
strife, hatred and uncharitableness, that, as 
sharp spears, pierce one's bosom at every turn ; 
think of jealousy, midnight murders, envy, want 
of faith, calumny, ingratitude, cruelty, and all 
which man in his daily sport inflicts upon man. 
Think upon disease, plague, famine, leprosy, 
fever, and all the aching pains our limbs suflTer 
Avithal ; visit in thought the hospital, the lazar 
house ; Oh ! surely God's hand is the chasten- 
ing hand of a father, that thus torments his chil- 
dren 1 His children ? his eternal enemies ! look, 
I am one ! He created the seeds of disease, 
raaremma, thirst, want ; he created man, — that 
^ most wretched of slaves ; oh ! know you not 



46 VALPERGA. [Ch. 111. 

what a wretch man is ? and what a store house 
of infinite pain is this much-vaunted human 
soul ? Look into your own heart ; or, if that be 
too peaceful, gaze on mine ; I will tear it opep 
for your inspection. There is remorse, hatred, 
grief— overwhelming, mighty, and eternal mi^, 
scry. God created me : am I the work of a be- 
neficent being ? Oh, what spirit mingled in my 
wretched frame love, hope, energy, confidence, 
—-to find indifference, to be blasted to despair, 
to be as weak as the fallen leaf, to be betrayed 
by all! Now 1 am changed, — I hate; — my 
energy is spent in curses, and if I trust, it is to 
be the more deeply wounded. 

'^ Did not the power you worship create the 
passions of man ; his desires which outleap 
possibihty, and bring ruin upon his head ? 
Did he not implant the seeds of ambition, re- 
venge and hate ? Did he not create love, the 
tempter : he who keeps the key of that man- 
sion whose motto must ever be 

Lasciate ogni speranza toi che intrate. 

And the imagination, tliat masterpiece of his 
malice; that spreads honey on the cup that 



Ch. III.] VALPERGA. 47 

you may drink poison ; that strews roses over 
thorns, thorns sharp and big as spears; that 
semblance of beauty which beckons you to the 
desart; that apple of gold with the heart of 
ashes; that foul image, with the veil of excel- 
lence; that mist of the maremma, glowing with 
roseate hues beneath the sun, that creates it, 
and beautifies it, to destroy you ; that diadem 
of nettles; that spear, broken in the heart! 
He, the damned and triumphant one, sat me- 
ditating many thousand years for the conclu- 
sion, the consummation, the final crown, the 
seal of all misery, which he might set on man's 
brain and heart to doom him to endless tor- 
ment ; and he created the Imagination. And 
then we are told the fault is ours ; good and 
evil are sown in our hearts, and ours is the 
tillage, ours the harvest; and can this jus- 
tify an omnipotent deity that he permits one 
particle of pain to subsist in his world ? Oh, 
never. 

'* I tell thee what ; there is not an atom of 
life in this all-peopled world that does not suf- 
fer pain; we destroy animals; — look at your 
own dress, which a myriad of living creatures 



48 VALPERGA. [Ch.lII. 

wove and then died; those sables, — a thousand 
hearts once beat beneath those skins, quenched 
in the agonies of death to furnish forth that 
cloak. Yet why not? While they lived, those 
miserable hearts beat under the influence of 
fear, cold and famine. Oh ! better to die, than 
to suffer ! The whale in the great ocean de- 
stroys nations of fish, but thousands live on 
him and torment him. Destruction is the 
watchword of the world ; the death by which 
it lives, the despair by which it hopes : oh, 
surely a good being created all this ! 

" Let me tell you, that you do ill to ally 
yourself to the triumphant spirit of evil, leaving 
the worship of the good, who is fallen and de- 
pressed, yet who still lives. He wanders about 
the world a proscribed and helpless thing, 
hooted from the palaces of kings, excommuni- 
cated from churches ; sometimes he wanders 
into the heart of man, and makes his bosom 
glow with love and virtue ; but so surely as he 
enters, misfortune, bound to him by his enemy, 
as a corpse to a living body, enters with him ; 
the wretch who has received his influence, be- 
comes poor, helpless and deserted ; happy if he 



Ch. III.] VALPERGA. 49 

be not burnt at the stake, vvhipt with iron, 
torn with reJ-hot pincers. 

" The Spirit of Evil chose a nation for his 
own ; the Spirit of Good tried to redeem that 
nation from its gulph of vice and misery, and 
was cruelly destroyed by it; and now, as the 
masterpiece of the enemy, they are adored to- 
gether ; and he the beneficent, kind and suffer- 
ing, is made the mediator to pull down curses 
upon us. 

'^ How quick and secure are the deeds of the 
evil spirit \ how slow and uncertain those of 
the good! I remember once a good and learn- 
ed friend of mine telling me, that the country 
about Athens was adorned by the most exqui- 
site works man had ever produced ; marble 
temples traced with divine sculpture, statues 
transcending human beauty; the art of man 
had been exhausted to embellish it, the Hves 
of hundreds of men had been wasted to ac- 
complish it, the genius of the wisest had been 
employed in its execution ; ages had passed, 
while slowly, year by year, these wonders had 
been collected ; some were almost falling 

VOL. III. D 



50 * VALPERGA. [Ch, III. 

through exceeding age, while others shone in 
their first infancy. Well:— a king, Phihp of 
Macedon, destroyed all these in three days, 
burnt them, razed them, annihilated them. 
This is the proportionate energy of good and 
evil; the produce of ages is the harvest of a 
moment; a man may spend years in curbing 
his passions, in acquiring wisdom, in becoming 
an angel in excellence; the brutahty of a fel- 
low creature, or the chance of war, may fell 
him in an instant; and all his knowledge and 
virtues become blank, as a moonless, starless 
night. 

^' Eutlianasia, my heart aches, and my spi- 
rits flag: I was a poor, simple girl; hut I have 
suffered much; and endurance, and bitter ex- 
perience have let me into the truth of things; 
the deceitful veil which is cast over this world, 
is powerless to hide its deformity from me. I 
see the cruel heart, which lurks beneath the 
beautiful skin of the pard ; I see the blight of 
autumn, in the green leaves of spring, the 
vv» inkles of age in the face of youth, rust on 
the burnished iron, storm in the very breast of 



Ch. III.] VALPERGA. 51 

calm, sorrow in the heart of joy ; all beauty- 
wraps deformity, as the fruit the kernel ; Time 
opens the shell, the seed is poison.'* 

The eyes of Beatrice shot forth sparks of fire 
as she poured out this anathema against the 
creation ; her cheeks were fevered with a hec- 
tic glow ; her voice, sharp and broken, which 
was sometimes raised almost to a shriek, and 
sometimes low^ered to a whisper, fell on tlie 
brain of Euthanasia like a rain of alternate fire 
and ice ; she shrunk and trembled beneath the 
flood of terror that inundated and confounded 
her understanding : but the eloquent prophe- 
tess of pA'il ceased at Inst, and, pale and ex- 
hausted, she sank down ; clasping Euthanasia 
in her arms, she hid her face on her knees, and 
sobbed, and wept : " Forgive me, if I have • 
said that which appears to you blasphemy ; I 
will unveil my heart to you, tell you my suffer- 
ings, and surely you will then curse with me 
the author of my being." 

Euthanasia spoke consolation alone; sha 
bade her weep no more ; that she need no 
longer fear or hate; that she might again love, 
hope and trust ; and that she as a tender sister 



52 VALPERGA. [Ch. 111. 

■would sympathize with and support her. The 
undisciphned mind of poor Beatrice was as a 
flower that droops beneath the storm ; but, on 
tlie first gleam of sunshine, raises again its head, 
even though the hail-stones and the wind might 
have broken and tarnished its leaves and its 
tints. She looked up, and smiled ; " I will do 
all that you tell me ; I will be docile, good and 
aflfe.ctionate ; — I will be obedient to your small- 
est sign, kindest, dearest Euthanasia. Trust 
me, you shall make me a Catholic again, if 
you will love me unceasingly for one whole 
year, and in the mean time I do not die. I 
am very teachable, very, very tractable ; but I 
have suffered greatly, as one day you will 
know ; for I will tell you every thing. Now, 
good bye ; I am very tired, and I think I shall 
sleep.'* 

" Sleep then, poor creature; here is a couch 
ready for you ; I will watch near you ; and 
may your dreams be pleasant." 

^^ Give me your hand then; I will hold it 
%vhile I rest; how small, and white, and soft it 
is ! Look at mine, it is yellow and dry ; once it 
was like yours ; I think it was rather smaller, 



Ch. III.] VALPERGA. 53 

but never so well shaped ; the tips of my lin- 
gers and my nails were never dyed by so roseate 
a tint as this, nor was the palm so silken so ft. 
You are very beautiful, and very good, dear 
Euthanasia ; I hope you are, and will be 
happy." 

Euthanasia kissed the forehead of this child 
of imagination and misery; and soon she slept, 
forgetful of all her sufferings. Euthanasia felt 
deeply interested in her; she felt that they 
were bound together, by their love for one who 
loved only himself; she thought over her wild 
denunciations ; and, s-trange to say, she felt 
doubly warmed with admiration of the crea- 
tion, and gratitude towards God, at the mo- 
ment that Beatrice had painted its defects. 
, She thought of the beauty of the world and 
the w^ondrous nature of man, until her mind 
was raised to an enthusiastic sentiment of hap- 
piness and praise. " And you also shall curb 
your wild thoughts,*' whispered Euthanasia, 
as she looked at the sleeping girl ; ^' I will en. 
deavour to teach you the lessons of true reli- 
gion; and, in reducing the wandering thoughts 



.54 VALPERGA. [Cll. III. 

of one so lovely and so good, I shall be in part 
fulfilling my task on the earth." 

For several days after this conversation 
Beatrice became peaceful and mild, saying 
little, and appearing complacent, almost con- 
tent; she attended mass, told her beads, and 
talked of going to confession. Euthanasia was 
astounded ; she was herself so steady in her 
principles, so firm in opinion and action, slow 
to change, but resolute having changed, that 
she was at a loss to understand the variable 
feelings and swift mutations of the poor, un- 
taught Beatrice. 

** Confess ! " she repeated ; " you promised 
that 1 should convert you in a year; but you 
have already forsaken your Paterin opinions ! " 
" No, indeed, I have not ; but it is of so little 
consequence ; I would please you, dearest, by 
seeming what I am not ; not that I am sure 
that I am not what you desire. You know, 
if God is good, he will forgive my errors : if 
he is evil, I care not to please him ; so I shall 
endeavour to please the virtuous and kind of 
this world, and you are one of those, my best 



Ch. III.] VALPERGA. 55 

friend. Besides, now I think of it, this world 
seems too beautiful to have been created by an 
evil spirit ; he would have made us all toads, 
the trees and flowers all mushrooms, and the 
rocks and mountains would have been huge, 
formless polypi. Yet there is evil ; but I will 
not trouble myself more about it ; you shall 
form my creed : and, as a lisping infant, v^-ith 
clasped hands, 1 will repeat my prayers after 

you." 

"Why so, dearest Beatrice? Why will 
you not recal tbe creeds of your childliood, 
as your adoptive parents taught them you ? I 
cannot school you better than they." 

" My childhood ! " cried the prophetess ; 
her eyes becoming dark and stormy, " what to 
become again a dupe, a maniac ? to fall again, 
as I have fallen? Cease, cease, in mercy 
cease, to talk of my childhood ; days of error, 
vanity and paradise! My lessons must all be 
new ; all retold in words signifying other ideas 
than what they signified during my mad, brief 
.dream of youth. Then faith was not a shadow : 
it was what these eyes saw ; I clutched hope, 
and found it certainty; I heard the angels of 



o6 VALPEPvGA. [Ch. III. 

heaven, and saw the souls of the departed ; 
can I ever see them again ? '* 

" Sweetest and most imfortunate, drive 
away memory, and take hope to you. Youth 
is indeed a dream ; and, if I spent it not in 
your extacies, yet beheve me I was not then 
as I am now. 1 am older than you, and know 
life better ; I have passed the fearful change 
from dream to reality, and am now calm. I 
liave known all your throes ; sometimes indeed 
they now visit me ; but I quench them, cast 
them aside, tread on them ; — so may you." 

" Never ! never ! " replied Beatrice : " I 
was born for wretchedness. When the fates 
twined my destiny, they mingled three threads ; 
the first was green hope, the second purple 
joy, the third black despair ; but the two first 
were very short, and soon came to an end ; a 
dreary line of black alone remains. Yet I 
would forget all that; and for many days I 
have been as calm as a bird that broods, rocked 
on her tree by a gentle wind ; full of a quiet, 
sleepy hfe. Should this state continue longer, 
I might become what you wish me to be ; 
but I find my soul awakening, and I fear a 



Ch, III.] VALPERGA. 5? 

relapse ; I fear the return of tears and endless 
groans. Oh ! let me wrap myself round you, 
my better angel, hope of my Ufe ; pour your 
balmy words upon me ; lay your cool, health- 
ful cheek near my burning one, let our pulses 
beat responsive ! Oh ! that once I could be- 
come less feverish, less wild, less like a dark 
and crimsoned thunder-cloud, driven away, 
away, through the unknown wildernesses of 
sky." 

Euthanasia was glad to hear her suffering 
friend talk, however wildly ; for she observed 
that, when she had exhausted herself in speech, 
she became calmer and happier; while, if she 
brooded silently over her cares, she became 
almost insane through grief. Occasionally 
she sought consolation in music; there was 
something magical in her voice, and in the 
tones she could draw from the organ or the 
harp : in her days of glory it had been said, 
Uiat she was taught to sing by angelic instruc- 
tors ; and now those remembered melodies 
remained, sole relics of her faded honours. 
The recollection of this sometimes disturbed 
her ; and she would suddenly break off her 
D5 



58 VALPERGA. [Ch. III. 

song, and peevishly exclaim, that music, like 
the rest of the world's masks, contained the 
soul of bitterness within its form of beauty. 

" Not so, dear girl," said Euthanasia ; " Eu- 
terpe has ever been so dear a friend of mine, 
that I cannot permit you to calumniate her 
unjustly ; there is to me an unalloyed pleasure 
in music. Some blessed spirit, compassionate 
of man's estate, and loving him, sent it, to teach 
him that he is other than what he seems : it 
comes, like a voice from a far world, to tell 
you that there are depths of intense emotion 
veiled in the blue empyrean, and the windows 
of heaven are opene«l by music alone. It 
chastens and lulls our extacies; and, if it 
awakens grief, it also soothes it. But more 
than to the happy or the sorrowful, music is 
an inestimable gift to those who forget all sub- 
limer emotions in the pursuits of daily li%. 
I listen to the talk of men ; I play with my 
embroidejy-frame ; I enter into society : sud- 
denly high song awakens me, and 1 leave all 
this tedious routine far, far distant; I listen, 
till all the world is changed, and the beautiful 
earth becomes more beautiful. Evening and 



Ch. III.] VALPERGA. 59 

all its soft delights, morning and all its refresh- 
ing loveliness ; — noonday, when the busy soul 
rests, like the sun in its diurnal course, and 
then gathering new strength, descends; all 
these, when thought upon, bring pleasure ; 
but music is far more deHcious than these. 
Never do I feel happier and better, than when 
1 have heard sweet music ; my thoughts .often 
sleep hke young children nestled in their cra- 
dles, until music awakens them, and they open 
their starry eyes. I may be mistaken ; but 
music seems to me to reveal to us some of the 
profoundeet secrets of the universe ; and the 
spirit, freed from prison by its charms, can 
thera soar, and gaze wdth eagle eyes on the 
eternal sun of this all-beauteous world.*' 

Beatrice srniled. — Since her days of happi- 
ness had ended. Euthanasia's enthusiasm had 
become more concentrated, more concealed ; 
but Beatrice again awoke her to words, and 
these two ladies, bound by the sweet ties of 
gratitude and pity, found in each other's con- 
verse some balm for their misfoi'tunes. C ir- 
cumstances had thus made friends of those 
whom nature seemed to separate : they were 



60 VAtPERGA. [Ch. III. 

much unlike ; but the wild looks of Beatrice 
sometimes reflected the soft light of Euthana- 
sia's eyes ; and Euthanasia found her heart, 
which was sinking to apathy, awake again, as 
she listened to Beatrice. And, though we 
may be unhappy, we can never be perfectly- 
wretched, while the mind is active ; it is inac- 
tion alone that constitutes true wretchedness. 
In the mean time her own journey to Flo- 
rence was put off indefinitely. She was too 
much interested in the fate of Beatrice, and 
already loved her too well, to desert her ; the 
poor prophetess appeared little capable of the 
journey, since the most trifling circumstance 
would awaken her wildest fancies, and fever 
and convulsions followed. Once indeed Eu- 
thanasia had mentioned her wish to go thither; 
Beatrice looked at her with flashing eyes, and 
cried, " Did you not promise never to desert 
me ? Are you faithless also ? '' 

" But would you not accompany me ? " 

^^ Do you see that river that flows near 

Lucca r " exclaimed Beatrice. ^' I fancy that 

it has flowed through the self-same banks these 

many thousand years ; and sooner will it desert 



Ch. III.] VALPERGA. fil 

tliern, than I this town. See you that cypress, 
that grows towering above all its neighbour 
trees in that convent-garden, I am as firm to 
this soil as that ; I will never leave this place 
but by force, and then I die." 

She said these wordsinher wildest manner; 
and they were followed by such an annihila- 
tion of strength, and such symptoms of fever, 
that Euthanasia did not again dare mention 
her removal to Florence. She also suffered 
less by her continued stay at Lucca ; for the 
feelings of her heart were so completely ab- 
sorbed in pity and love for Beatrice, that the 
painful ideas of many years' growth seemed 
rooted out by a new and mightier power. She 
was so little selfish, that she could easily forget 
her own sorrows, deep as they were, in her 
sympathy for the unhappy prophetess, who had 
suffered evils tremendous and irremediable. 

Castruccio often sent to learn of the welfare 
of this poor girl, and Euthanasia answered his 
enquiries with exactness. She did this; for 
she thought that perhaps the future destiny of 
Beatrice was in his hands, and that he might 



62 VALPERGA. [Ch. III. 

engraft life and even happiness on the blighted 
plant. 

One day Beatrice went out. It was the fiKst 
time she had quitted the palace; and Eutha- 
nasia was vexed and anxious. After an ab- 
sence of some hours she returned ; she was 
clothed in a great coarse cloak that entirely 
disguised her ; she put it off; and, trembling, 
blushing, panting, she threw herself into the 
arms of her protectress. 

" I have se^n him ! I have seen him ! '' 

" Calm yourself, poor fluttering bird ; you 
have seen him ; well, well, he is changed, much 
altered ; why do you weep ? '' 

" Aye, he is changed ; but he is far more 
beautiful than ever he was. Oh, Euthanasia, 
how radiant, how divine he is ! His eyes, 
which, like the eagle's, could outgaze the sun, 
yet melt in the sweetest love, as a cloud, shin- 
ing, yet soft; his brow, manly and expansive, 
on which his raven curls rest; his upturned 
lips, where pride, and joy, and love, and wis- 
dom, and triumph live, small spirits, ready to 
obey hjs smallest will; and his head, cinctured 



Ch. I'l.] VALPERGA. 65 

by a slight diadem, looks carved out by the in- 
tensest knowledge of beauty ! How graceful 
his slightest motion ! and his voice,— bis voice 
is here, " 

Beatrice put her hand upon her heart; her 
eyes were filled with tears ; and the whole 
expression of her face was softened and hu- 
manized. Suddenly she stopped ; she dried 
her eyes ; and, fixing them on Euthanasia, she 
took her two hands jn hers, and looked on her, 
as if she would read her soul. " Beautiful crea- 
ture," she said, " once he told me that he lov^d 
you. Did he not ? does he not ? Why are you 
separated ? do you not love him ? " 

" 1 did ; once I did truly ; but he has cfest 
ofl" that which was my love ; and, lite a flower 
plucked from the stalk, it has wiT;hered — as you 
see it." 

" Aye, that is strange. What did he cast 
off'? '' 

" Why will you make me speak ? He cast 
off humanity, honesty, honourable feeling, all 
that I prize." 

" Forms, forms, — mere forms, my mistaken 
Euthanasia. He remained, and was not that 



64 VALPERGA. [Ch. Iir. 

every thing ? Methinks, it would please me, 
that my lover should cast off all humanity, and 
be a reprobate, and an outcast of his species. 
Oh ! then how deeply and tenderly I should 
love him ; soiled with crimes, his hands drip- 
ping blood, 1 would shade him as the flowering 
shrub invests the ruin ; I would cover him with 
a spotless veil ; — my intensity of love would an- 
nihilate his wickedness; — every one would 
hate him ; — but, if all adored him, it would not 
came near the sum of my single affection. I 
should be every thing to him, life, and hope ; 
he would die in his remorse; but he would 
live again and again in the liglit of my love; I 
would invest him as a silvery mist, so that 
none should see how evil he was ; I would 
pour out before him large draughts of love, 
that he should become drunk with it, until he 
grew good and kind. So you deserted this 
glorious being, and he has felt the pangs of 
unrequited affection, the helpless throes of love 
cast as water upon the sand of the desert ? Oh, 
indeed I pity him ! " 

" Beheve me," cried Euthanasia, " he has 
other affections. Glory and conquest are his 



Ch. III.] VALPERGA. 65 

'mistresses, and he is a successful lover ; already 
he has deluged our vallies in blood, and turned 
our habitations into black and formless ruins ; 
he has torn down the banners of the Floren- 
tines, and planted his own upon the towers of 
noble cities ; I believe him to be happy." 

*^ Thank God for that; I would pour out 
my blood, drop by drop, to make him happy. 
But he is not married, and you have deserted 
him; 1 love him; he has loved me; is it im- 
possible — ? Oh ! foolish, hateful wretch that 
I am, what do I say ? No creature was ever 
so utterly undone ! " 

Beatrice covered her face with her hands ; 
her struggles were violent; she shrunk from Eu- 
thanasia's consoling embrace ; and at length, 
quite overcome, she sank in convulsions on the 
pavement of the hall. Her paroxysm was long 
and fearful ; it was succeeded by a heavy le- 
thargic sleep ; during the first part of which 
she was feverish and uneasy ; but, after some 
hours, her cheeks became pale, her pulse beat 
slower, and her breath was drawn regularly. 

Euthanasia watched beside her alone : when 



66 VALPEKGA. [Ch. III. 

^he found that she was sleeping quietly and 
deeply, she retired from her bedside ; aad, sit- 
ting at some distance, she tried to school her- 
self on the bitter feelings that had oppressed her 
since tlie morning. Euthanasia was so self- 
examining, that she never allowed a night to 
elapse without recalling her feelings and ac- 
tions of the past day ; she endeavoured to be 
simply just to herself, and her soul had so 
long been accustomed to this discipline, that 
it easily laid open its dearest secrets, JVlis- 
fortune had not dulled her sense of right and 
wrong; her understanding was still clear, 
though tinged by the same lofty enthusiasm 
which had ever been her characteristic. She 
now searched her soul to find what were the 
feelings which still remained to lier concerning 
Castruccio ; she hardly knew whether it was 
hate or love. Hate ! could she hate one, to 
whom once she had delivered up ^11 her 
thoughts, as to the tribunal of her God, whom 
she had loved as one to whom she was wiUing 
to unite herself for ever ? And could she love 
one, who had deceived her in her dearest hopes, 



Ch. III.] VALPERGA. 67 

who had lulled her on the brink of a precipice, 
to plunge her with greater force to eternal un- 
happiness: She felt neither hatred, nor revenge, 
nor contempt colder than either; she felt grief 
alone, and that sentiment was deeply engraven 
on her soul. 



68 VA LP ERG A. [Ch. IV. 



CHAPTER IV. 

Beatrice's Narrative. 

She was awakened from this reverie by the 
voice of Beatrice, who called to her to com e 
near. ^^ I am quite recovered," she said, 
" though weak ; I have been very ill to-day, 
and 1 am frightened to think of the violence of 
my sensations. But sit near me, beloved friend; 
it is now night, and you will hear no sound 
but my feeble voice ; while I fulfil my promise 
of relating to you my wretched history." 

" Mine own Beatrice, do not now vex your- 
self with these recollections ; you must seek 
calm and peace alone ; let memory go to its 
grave." 

^' Nay, you must know all," replied Beatrice, 
peevishly ; " why do you balk me ? indeed I 
do best when I follow my own smallest incli- 
nations ; for, when I try to combat them, I 



Ch.lV.] VALPERGA. 69 

am again ill, as I was this morning. Sit be- 
side me ; I will make room for you on my 
couch ; give me your hand, but turn away 
your soft eyes ; and now I will tell you every 
thing. 

'^ You know that I loved Castruccio ; how 
much I need hardly tell : I loved him beyond 
human love, for I thought heaven itself had in- 
terfered to unite us. 1 thought— — alas ! it is 
with aching pain that I recollect my wild 
dreams, — that we two were chosen from the 
rest of the world, gifted with celestial faculties. 
It appeared to me to be a dispensation of Pro- 
vidence, that I should have met him at the full 
height of my glory, when I was burning with 
triumph and joy. I do not think, my own 
Euthanasia, that you can ever have experi- 
enced the vigour and fire of my sensations. 
Victory in an almost desperate struggle, suc- 
cess in art, love itself, are earthly feelings, sub- 
ject to change and death; but, when these 
three most exquisite sensations are bestowed 
by the visible intervention of heaven, thus 
giving security to the unstable, and eternity to 
what is fleeting, such an event fills the over- 



70 VALPBRGA. [Ch. IV. 

brimming cup, intoxicates the brain, and ren- 
ders her who feels iheni more than mortal. 

" Victory and glory I had, and an assurance 
of divine inspiration ; the fame of what 1 was, 
was spread among the people of my country ; 
^ then love came, and flattered, and softened, 
and overcame me. Well, that I will pass over : 
to conceive that all I felt was human, com- 
mon, and now faded, disgusts me, and makes 
me look back with horror to my lost paradise. 
Castruccio left me ; and I sat *1 cannot tell 
how long, white, immoveable, and intranced ; 
hours, 1 believe days, passed ; I cannot tell, for 
in truth I think I was mad. Yet I was silent ; 
not a word, not a tear, not a sound escaped 
me, until some one mentioned the name of Cas- 
truccio before me, and tlien I wept. 1 did not 
rave or weep aloud ; 1 crept about like a sha- 
dow, brooding over my own thoughts, and 
trying to divine the mystery of my destiny. 

^^ At length I went to my g(xxl failier, the 
bishop ; I knell down before him : ' Rise, dear 
child,' he said ; * how pale you are ! what ha:> 
quenched die fire of your brilliant eyes? ' 

" * Father, holy father/ I replied, ' I will 



Ch. IV.] VALPERGA. 71 

not rise till you answer me one question.' — 
My looks were haggard with want of rest; my 
tangled locks fell on my neck ; my glazed eyes 
could scarcely distinguish any object. 

" ' My blessed Beatrice/ said the good old 
man, * you are much unhke yourself: but 
speak ; I know that you can ask nothing that I 
can refuse to tell." 

" * Tell me then, by your hopes of heaven/ 
I cried, ' whether fraud was used in the Judge^ 
merit of God that I underwent, or how I es- 
caped the fearful burning of the hot shares.' 

" Tears started in my father's eyes ; he rose, 
and embraced me, and, lifting me up, said with 
passion, — * Thank God ! my prayers are ful- 
filled. Beatrice, you shall not be deceived, 
you will no longer deceive yourself; and do 
i/ot be unhappy, but joy that the deceit is re- 
moved from you, and that you may return from 
your wild and feverish extacies to a true and 
real piety.' 

" * This is fill well/ I replied calmly; 'but 
tell me truly how it happened.' 

'* ' That I cannot, my child, for I was myself 
kept in the dark ; I only know that fraud was 



72 VALPERGA. [Ch. IV. 

most certainly practised for your deliverance. 
My child, we have all of us much erred ; you 
less than any ; for you have been deceived, led 
away by your feelings and imagination to be- 
lieve yourself that which you are not/ 

" I will not repeat to you all that the bishop 
said ; it was severe, but kind. First he shewed 
me, how I had deceived myself, and nourished 
extacies and transports of the soul which were 
in no way allied to holiness ; and then he told 
me how I .must repair my faults by deep 
humihty, prayer, and a steady faith in that 
alone which others taught, not what I myself 
imagined. I hstened silently ; but I heard 
every word ; I was very docile ; I believed all 
he said ; and although my soul bled with its 
agony, I accused none, none but myself. At 
first I thought that I would tell my countrymen 
of their deception. But, unsupported by my 
supernatural powers, I now shrunk from all 
display ; no veil, no wall could conceal me suf- 
ficiently ; for it could not hide me from my- 
self. My very powers of speech deserted me, 
and I could not articulate a syllable ; I listened, 
my eyes bent on the earth, my cheek pale ; 1 



Ch. IV.] VALPEllGA. 73 

listened until I almost became marble. At 
length the good old man ceased; and, with 
many words of affectionate comfort, he bade 
me go and make firm peace with my own 
heart, and that tiien he hoped to teach me a 
calm road to happiness. Happiness ! surely 
I must have been stone ; for I neither frowned 
in despite, nor laughed in derision, when that 
term was applied to any thing that I could 
hereafter feel. I kissed his hand, and with- 
drew. 

" Did you ever feel true humihty ? a pro- 
stration of soul, that accuses itself alone, and 
asks pardon of a superior power with entire 
penitence, and a confiding desertion of all self- 
merit, a persuasion intimate and heartfelt of 
one's own un worthiness ? That was what I 
felt ; I had been vain, proud, presumptuous ; 
now 1 fell to utter poverty of spirit ; yet it was 
not poverty, for there was a richness in my pe- 
nitence which reminded me of the sacred text, 
that says * Oh, that my head were water, and 
mine eyes a fountain of tears ! ' 

"Then succeeded to this mental humihation, 

a desire to mortify and punish myself for my 
VOL. III. £ 



74 VALPEllGA. ICh, IV. 

temerity and mistakes. I was possessed by a 
spirit of martyrdom. Sometimes I thought 
that 1 would again undergo the Judgement of 
Gvd fairly and justly: but now I shrunk from 
public exhibition ; besides, the good bishop 
had strongly reprobated these temptations of 
God's justice. At other times I thought that 
I would confess all to my excellent father; and 
this perhaps is what I ought to have done; 
what would really have caused me to regain a 
part of the calm that I had lost ; but I could 
not; womanly shame forbade me; death would 
have been a far preferable alternative. At 
length an idea struck me, that seemed to my 
overstrained feelings to transcend all other peni- 
tence ; a wretchedness and anguish that might 
well redeem my exceeding sins. 

"Think you that, while I thus humbled 
myself, I forgot Castruccio ? Never! the love 
I bore him clung around me, festered on my 
soul, and kept me ever alive to pain. Love 
him! I adored him; to whisper his name ionly 
in solitude, where none could hear my voice 
but my own most attentive ear, thrilled me 
with transport. I tried to banish him my 



Ch. IV.] VALPEKGA. 75 

thoughts ; he recurred in my dreams, which 1 
could not control. I saw him there, beautiful 
as his real self, and my heart was burnt by 
my emotion. Well ; it was on this excess of 
love that I built my penitence, which was to 
go as a pilgrim and ask alms of you. Eutha- 
nasia! I only knew your name ; the very idea 
of seeing you made me shiver. I was three 
months before 1 could steel my heart to this 
resolve. I saw none ; I spoke to none ; I was 
occupied by my meditations alone, and those 
were deep and undermining as the ocean. 

^^ Well ; as I have said, 1 dwelt long and 
deeply upon my plan, until every moment 
seemed a crime, that went by before I put it in 
execution. The long winter passed thus; my 
poor mother, the lady Marchesana, watched 
me, as a child might watch a favourite bird 
fluttering in the agonies of death. She saw 
that some mysterious and painful feeling op- 
pressed me, that I no longer appeared in pub- 
lic, that I shunned the worship of my admirers, 
that the spirit of prophecy was dead within 
me ; but I was silent, and reserved ; and her 
reverence for me (Good angels! her reverence 
E2 



76 VALPKRGA. [Ch. IV, 

for me!) prevented any enquiries. In the 
spring the bishop Marsilio was promoted to 
another see, and he was obliged to go to Avi- 
gnon to receive the investiture. Excellent and 
beloved old man 1 he blessed me, and kissed 
me, and with words of aflfectionate advice 
departed. I have never seen him more.* 

" When he was gone, the labour of my de- 
parture was lightened; and in gentle and hesi- 
tating words I told my best and loved mother 
that I had vowed a pilgrimage to Rome : she 
wished to accompany me. Those were heart- 
breaking scenes, my Euthanasia, when I left 
all my friends, all who loved me, and whom I 
had ever loved : I knew that I should never 
see them again. How did I know this ? In 
truth, after having performed my vow with 
regard to you, I intended to visit the sepul- 
chres at Rome ; and I might then have return- 
ed. I was no prophetess ; and yet I felt that 
mine was not a simple pilgrimage, but an eter- 
nal separation from all former associations, 
from every one I had ever known. Thus, 
hopeless of future good, I deserted all that yet 
rendered Ufe in any degree sufferable : I did 



■*f 



Ch. IV.] VALPERGA. 77 

this to satisfy my sense of duty, to do homage 
to the divinity by some atonement for his vio- 
lated laws : I did this ; and henceforw^ard I 
was to be an outcast, a poor lonely shrub on 
a bleak heath, a single reed in a vast and over- 
flowing river. 

*^ I had known too much luxury in my youth ; 
every one loved me, and tended on me ; I had 
seen about me eyes ' beaming with affection, 
smiles all my own, words of deep interest and 
respect, that had become to me a second na- 
ture, I departed alone at four in the morning 
from Ferrara by the secret entrance of the 
viscountess's palace, on a clear and lovely day 
in the spring. I was dressed as the meanest 
pilgrim, and I carefully hid my white hands 
and fair cheeks, which might have betrayed 
my way of life during the past; except indeed 
wiien I was alone, — then I loved to throw off 
my cloak, to bare my arms, my face, my neck 
to the scorching sun-beams, that T might the 
sooner destroy a delicacy I despised : the work 
was quickly done ; a few hours exposure to 
the sun of noon burnt up my skin, and made 
it red and common. 



7S VALP^RGA. [Cli.lV. 

'' The fn«t day was one of unmixed pain ; 
the sun parched my frame ; my feet were blis- 
tered, my limbs ached ; I walked all day, until 
bodily fatigue lulled my mental anguish, for 1 
was unhappy beyond all words. Alone, de- 
serted by God and man, I had lost my firm 
support, n)y belief in my own powers ; I had 
lost my friends ; and I found, that the vain, 
self-sufficing, cloud-inhabiting Beatrice was in 
truth a poor dependent creature, whose heart 
sunk, when in the evening she came to a clear 
brook running through a little wood, and she 
found no cup to drink, and no dainties to sa- 
tisfy her appetite. 1 dragged my weary limbs 
three miles further, to an hospital for pilgrims, 
and repined over my coarse fare and coarser 
bed : — I, the ethereal prophetess, who fancied 
that I could feed upon air and beautiful 
thoughts, who had regarded my body but as a 
servant to my will, to hunger and thirst only 
as I bade it. 

"Alone! alone! I travelled on day after day, 
in short, but wearisome journeys, and I felt 
the pain of utter and forced solitude ; the burn- 
ing sun shone, and the dews fell at evening. 



Cii. IV.] VALPERGA. 79 

but there was no breeze, no coolness to refresh 
me; the nights were close, and my hmbs, dried 
with the scorching of the day, and stiff with 
walking, burned all night as if a furnace had 
glowed within them. Were these slight evils ? 
Alas ! I was a spoiled child, and I felt every 
pain as an agony. 

" I fell ill ; I caught cold one evening, when 
just after sunset I threw myself down to rest 
under a tree, and the unwholesome dew fell 
upon me. I got a low fever^ which for a long 
time I did not understand, feeling one day 
well, and the next feverish, cold, and languid. 
Some attendant nuns at an hospital found out 
my disorder, and nursed me ; I was confined 
for six weeks ; and, when I issued forth, little 
of the fire of my eyes, or of the beauty the lady 
JVJarchesana used to dwell upon, out-lived this 

attack. — I was yellow, meagre, a shadow 

of what I had been. 

^' My journey to your castle was very long. 
I crossed the Apennines during the summer, 
and passing through Florence J arrived at 
Pistoia in the beginning of June. But now my 
heart again foiled ; 1 heard of your name, your 



so VALPERGA. [Cli. IV. 

prosperity, your beauty, the respect and ado- 
ration you every where excited : it was a 
double penance to humble myself before so 
excelling a rival. If you had been worthless, 
a self-contenting pride would have eased my 
wouwds, but to do homage to my equal — oh! 
to one far my superior, — was a new lesson to 
my stubborn soul. I remained nearly three 
months at Pistoia, very unhappy, hesitating, — 
cast about, as a boat that for ever shifts its 
sail, but can never find the right wind to lead 
it into port. 

"I visited you in September; do you re- 
member my coming? do you remember my 
hesitating gait, and low and trembhng voice? 
I was giddy — sick — I thought that death was 
upon me, for that nothing but that great 
change could cause such an annihilation of my 
powers, such an utter sinking of my spirit. 
A cold dew stood upon my forehead, my eyes 
were glazed and sightless, my limbs trembled 
as with convulsions. Castruccio loved you ! 
Castruccio ! it is long since I have mentioned 
his name : during this weary journey never did 
his loved image for a moment quit its temple, 



Ch. IV.j VALPERGA. 81 

its fane, its only home, that it still and for ever 
fills. Love him! it was madness; yet I did; 
— yet 1 do ;— put your hand upon my heart, 
— does it not beat fast r '' 

Euthanasia kissed poor Beatrice's forehead; 
and, after a short pause, she continued ; 

" My penance was completed, yet I did 
not triumph ; an unconquerable sadness hung 
over me ; miserable dreams haunted my sleep ; 
and their recollected images strayed among my 
day-thoughts, as thin and grim ghosts, frighten- 
ing and astounding me. Once, — I can never 
forget, — I had been oppressed for several days 
by an overpowering and black melancholy, for 
which I could in no manner account ; it was 
not regret or grief; it was a sinking, an anni- 
hilation of all my mental powers in which I 
was a passive sufferer, as if the shadow of some 
mightier spirit was cast over to darken and 
depress me. 1 was haunted as by a prophecy, 
or rather a sense of evil, which I could neither 
define nor understand. Three evenings after, 
as I sat beside a quiet spring that lulled me 
almost to insensibility, the cause of my mourn- 
ful reveries suddenly flashed across m^^ it 
E 5 



S^i VALPERGA. [Cii. IV, 

Stalked on my recollection, as a terrific and gi- 
gantic shadow, and made me almost die with 
terror. The memory of a dream flashed across 
me. Again and again 1 have dreamed this 
dream, and always on the eve of some great mis- 
fortune. It is my genius, my daemon. What 
was it ? there was something said, something 
done, a scene pourtrayed. Listen attentively, 
I intr^at ; there was a wide plain flooded by 
the waters of an overflowing river, the road 
was dry, beirng on the side of a hill above the 
level of the plain, and I kept along the path 
which declined, wondering if I should come to 
an insurmountable obstacle ; at a distance be- 
fore me they were driving a flock of sheep ; on 
my left, on the side of the hill, there was a ruined 
circuit of wall, which inclosed the dilapidated 
houses of a deserted town ; at some distance 
a drear}^ large, ruinous house, half like a cas- 
tie, yet without a tower, dilapidated, and over- 
grown with moss, was dimly seen, islanded 
by the flood on which it cast a night-black 
shade ; the scirocco blew, and covered the sky 
with fleecy clouds; and the mists in the di- 
stance hovered low over the plain ; a bat above 



Ch. IV.] VALPERGA. 83 

me wheeled around. Then soinething hap- 
pened, what I cannot now tell, terrific it most 
certainly w^s ; Euthanasia, there is something 
in this strange world, that we none of us un- 
<Jerstand. 

" Euthanasia, I came to that scene ; if I live, 
I did ! I saw it all as I had before seen it in the 
slumbers of the night. Great God, \yhat am 
1 ? 1 am frailer than the first autumnal leaf 
that falls ; I am overpowered.'' 

She paused sobbing with passion ; a cling- 
ing horror fell upon Euthanasia ; they were 
for a long time silent, and then Beatrice in a 
low subdued voice continued : 

*' I had returned to Florence ; I had passed 
through Arezzo ; I had left Thrasymene to the 
north ; I had passed through Perugia, Foligno, 
and Terni, and was descending towards the 
plain surrounding Rome ; the Tiber had over- 
flowed, the whole of the low country was un- 
der water; but 1 proceeded, descending the 
mountains, until, having passed IS arni, I came 
to the lowest hill which bounds the Campa- 
gna di Roma ; the scirocco blew ; the mists 
\yere on the hills, and half concealed the head 



84 VALPERGA. [Ch. IV. 

of lone Soracte ; the white waters, cold and 
dreary, were spread far, waste and shelterless ; 
on my left was a high dark wall surrounding a 
rained town — I looked, — some way beyond I 
saw on the road a flock of sheep almost lost in 
the distance, — my brain was troubled, I grew 
dizzy and sick — when my glazed eyes caught 
a glance of an old, large, dilapidated house 
islanded in the flood, — the dream flashed across 
my memory ; I uttered a wild shriek, and fell 
lifeless on the road. 

" I again aw^oke, but all was changed : I 
was lying on a couch, in a vast apartment, 
whose loose tapestries waved and sighed in the 
wind ; — near me were two boys holding torches 
which flared, and their black smoke was driven 
across my eyes ; an old woman was chafing 
my temples. — I turned my head from the light 
of the torches, and then I first saw my wicked 
and powerful enemy : he leaned against the 
wall, observing me ; his eyes had a kind of 
fascination in them, and, unknowing what I 
did, hardly conscious that he w^as a human 
creature, (indeed for a time it appeared to me 
only a continuation of my dream,) I gazed on 



Ch. IV.] VALPERGA. 85 

his face, which became illuminated by a proud 
triumphant, fiendlike smile.— I felt sick at 
heart, and relapsed into a painful swoon. 

" Well : I promised to be brief, and I go 
on dwelling on the particulars of my tale, un- 
til your fair cheek is blanched still whiter by 
fear. But I have said enough, nor will I tell 
that which would chill your warm blood with 
horror. I remained three years in this house ; 
and what I saw, and what I endured, is a tale 
for the unhallowed ears of infidels, or for those 
who have lost humanity in the sight of blood, 
and not for so tender a heart as yours. It has 
changed me, much changed me, to have been 
witness of these scenes; I entered young, I 
came out grey, old and withered ; I went in 
innocent; and, if innocence consist in igno- 
rance, I am now guilty of the knowledge of 
crime, which it would seem that fiends alone 
could contrive. 

" What was he, who was the author and 
mechanist of these crimes ? he bore a human 
name ; they say that his lineage was human ; 
yet could he be a man ? During the day he 
was absent ; at night he returned, and his roofs 



S6 VALPERGA. [Oil. IV. 

rung with the sounds of festivity, mingled with 
shrieks and imprecations. It was the carnival 
of devils, when we miserable victims were 
dragged out to • 

*^ Enough ! enough 1 Euthanasia, dp you 
wonder that J, who haye bjeeij the slavjB qf in- 
carnate Evil, should have become a Paterin ? 

^^ That time has passed as a dream. Often 
my faculties were exerted to the utmost ; my 
energies alive, at work, combating ;— -but I 
struggled against victory, and was ever van- 
quished, I have seen the quiet stars shine, 
and the shadow of the grated window of the 
hall lie upon the moon-enlightened pavement, 
and it crawled along silently as 1 had observed 
it in childhood, so that truly 1 inhabited the 
same world as you, — yet how different ! Ani- 
mal life was the same; tlie household dog 
knew, and was at last obedient to my voice ; 
the cat slumbered in the sun ; — what was the 
influence that hung alone over the mind of 
man, rendering it cruel, hard and fiendlike ? 

" And who was the author of these ills ? 
There ^vas something about him that might be 
called beautiful ; but it was the beauty of the 



Ch. IV.] VALPERGA. gj 

tiger, of lightning, of the cataract tliat destroys. 
Obedience waited on his slightest motion ; for 
he made none, that did not command ; his 
followers worshipped him, but it was as a sa- 
vage might worship the god of evil. His slaves 
dared not murmur; — his eyes beamed with 
irresistible fire, his smile was as death. I hated 
him ; and 1 alone among his many victims was 
not quelled to submission. I cursed him — I 
poured forth eloquent and t'lmultuous male- 
dictions on his head, until I changed his de- 
tested love into less dreadful, less injurious 
hate. Yet then I did not escape ; his boil- 
ing and hideous passions, turned to revenge, 
now endeavoured to wreak themselves in my 
misery. These limbs, my Euthanasia, have 
been wrenched in tortures ; cold, famine and 
thirst have kept like blood-hounds a perpetual 
watch upon my w^earied life ; yet I still live 
to remember and to curse. 

" But, though life survived these rending 
struggles, my reason sank beneath them !— ' 
I became mad. Oh ! dearest friend, may you 
never know what I suffered, when I perceived 
the shadow of a false vision overpower me, 
and my sickening throes; wlien the bars of my 



88 VALPERGA. [Ch. IV. 

dungeon, its low roof, and black thick air, 
would, as it were, peer upon me with a sti- 
fling sense of reality amidst my insane trans- 
ports. 1 struggled to recall my reason, and to 
preserve it; I wept, I prayed ;— but I was 
again lost ; and the fire that dwelt in my brain 
gave unnatural light to every object. But 1 
must speak of that no more ; methinks 1 again 
feel, what it is madness only to recollect. 

" I told you that I remained for three years 
in this infernal house. You can easily ima- 
gine how slowly the days and nights succeeded 
one to another, each adding to my age, each 
adding one misery more to my list. Still I was 
the slave of him, who was a man in form 
alone, and of his companions, who, if they did 
not equal him in malice, yet were more vile, 
more treacherous, than he. At length the 
Pope's party besieged the castle. The many 
crimes of its possessor had drawn on him the 
hatred of the country round ; and the mon^nt 
that a leader appeared, the whole peasantry 
flocked as to a crusade to destroy their oppres- 
sor. He was destroyed. I saw him die, calm, 
courageous and unrepenting. I stood alone 
near his couch of blood-stained cloaks thrown 



Cb*lV.] VALPERGA. 80 

in a heap upon the floor, on which when he 
staggered into the room he had fallen; he 
asked me for a cup of water; I raised his 
head, and gave him to drink ; he said — ^ I feel 
new strength, I shall be better soon.' And, 
saying those words, he died. 

" I was now free. I arose from the floor 
on which I knelt ; and dividing from my eyes 
my hair dabbled in his blood, I cut off* with 
his dagger the long and dripping locks, and 
threw them on his body. I disguised me in 
the clothes of one of his pages, and hid myself, 
until by the submission of his followers the 
outlet from my prison should be free. As I 
said before, it was more a vast palace than a 
castle, being without towers or battlements ; 
but it was fortified by numberless ditches and 
other obstacles, apparently small, yet which, 
defended by slingers and archers, became al- 
most impregnable. But when the chief died, 
these were deserted ; and the partners of his 
rapine and his feasts filled the air with their 
savage lamentations. The fortress was taken ; 
and I escaped to the mountains, the wild, 



90 VALPERGA. [Ch. IV. 

wild mountains, — I sought them as a home 
after my long and painful imprisonment. 

" I was now free. The ilex trees shaded 
me; the waters murmured beside me; the 
sweet winds passed over my cheeks. I felt 
new life. I was no longer a haggard prisoner, 
the despairing victim of others' crimes, the in- 
habitant of the dark and blood-stained walls of 
a house, which hedged me in on all sides, and 
interrupted the free course of my health even 
in sleep. I w^as again Beatrice ; 1 again felt 
the long absent sensations of joy : it was para- 
dise to me, to see the stars of heaven, unim- 
peded by the grates of my dungeon-windows, 
to walk, to rest, to think, to speak, uninter- 
rupted and unheard. 1 became delirious with 
joy ; 1 embraced the rough trunks of the old 
trees, as if they were my sisters in freedom and 
delight ; — I took up in my hand the sparkling 
waters of the stream, and scattered them to the 
winds ; — 1 threw myself on the earth, I kissed 
the rocks, I raved with tumultuous pleasure. 
Free 1 free ! I can run, until my strength fails ; 
I can rest on a mossy bank, until my strength 



Clu IV/j VALPEUGA. 91 

returns ; 1 hear the waving of the branches ; I 
see the flight of the birds ; I can lie on the grassy 
floor of my mother-earth so long un visited ; 
and I can call natifi'e my own again. It was 
autumn, and the underwood of the forest had 
strewn the ground with its withered leaves; 
the arbutus-berries, chesnuts, and other fruits 
satisfied my appetite. I felt no want, no 
fatigue ; the common shapes of this world 
seemed arrayed in unusual loveliness, to wel- 
come and feast me on my new-found hberty. 

" I wandered many days, and penetrated 
into the wald country of the Abruzzi. But I 
was again lost : I know not what deprived me 
of reason thus, when I most needed it. Whe- 
ther it were the joy, or the sudden change, at- 
tendant on a too intense sensation of freedom, 
which made me feel as if I interpenetrated all 
nature, alive and boundless. I have recollec- 
tions, as if sometimes I saw the woods, the 
green earth, and blue sky, and heard the roar- 
ing of a mighty waterfal which splashed me 
with its cold waters : but there is a blank, as 
of a deep, lethargic sleep; and many weeks 



92 VALPERGA. [Ch. IV. 

passed before I awoke again, and entered upon 
the reality of life. 

'"f I found myself in a cavern lying on the 
ground. It was night; and a solitary lamp 
burned, fastened to the wall of the cave ; the 
half-extinguished ashes of a fire gUmmered in 
a recess ; and a few utensils that appeared to 
have been intended for the preparing food, 
seemed to mark this as a human habitation. 
It was dry, and furnished with a few benches 
and a table, on which lay bread and fruits. I 
felt as if I had become the inhabitant of the 
dwelling of a spirit ; and, with a strange, half- 
painful, half-pleasurable feeling, I raised an 
apple to my lips, that by its fragrance and 
taste I might assure myself that it was earthly. 
Then again I looked around for some fellow- 
creature. I found a narrow passage from my 
cave, which led to an inner apartment much 
smaller and very low ; on the ground, on a bed 
of leaves lay an old man : his grey hairs were 
thinly strewn on his venerable temples, his 
beard white, flowing and soft, fell to his gir- 
dle ; he smiled even in his sleep a gentle smile 



Ch. IV.] VALPERGA. §3 

of benevolence. I knelt down beside him; 
methought it was my excellent father, the lord 
JVI arsilio ; but that there were greater traces 
of thought and care upon the fallen cheeks and 
wrinkled brow of this old man. 

" He awoke : * My poor girl/ he said, * what 
would you ? ' 

" ' I wish to know where I am, and what I 
do here ? ' 

" My words convinced my good protector, 
that the kindly sleep into which his medicines 
had thrown me, had restored my reason ; and, 
it being now day-break, he arose, and opened 
the door of his cave. It was dug under the 
side of a mountain, covered by ivy, wild vines, 
and other parasites, and shaded by ilex trees ; 
it opened on tlie edge of a small grassy plat- 
form, with a steep wall of rock behind, and 
a precipice before : the mountain in which it 
was scooped, was one of many that inclosed a 
rugged valley ; and, from one spot on the plat- 
form, I could distinguish a mass of waters fall- 
ing with a tremendous crash, which were after- 
wards hidden by the inequalities of the moun- 



94 VALPEKGA. [Ch. IV. 

tain, and then were seen, a turbid and swift 
river, at the bottom of the valley. The lower 
sides of the mountain were covered with olive 
woods, whose seagreen colour contrasted with 
the dark ilex, and the fresh-budding leaves of a 
few chesnuts. I felt cold, and the mountain had 
just begun to be tipped by the rising sun ; it 
seemed as if no path led to or from the plat- 
form, and that we were shut out from the 
whole world, suspended on the side of a rocky 
mountain, 

" This cavern had been an hospital for me 
during the long winter months. The old man 
had found me straying wildly among the forests, 
complaining of the heavy chains that bound 
me, and the wrongs and imprisonment that I 
suffered . He, poor wretch, was an outcast of 
his species, a heretic, a Paterin, who hid him- 
self in the woods from the fury of the priests 
who would have destroyed him. He led me 
to his cave ; he tended me as the kindest fa- 
ther ; he restored me to reason, and even then 
did not desert me. He lived here quite alone ; 
no one was intrusted with the secret of his re- 



Ch. IV.] VALPEKGA. 9$ 

treat ; at niglit, muffled up and disguised, he 
often went to seek for food, and again hastened 
back to peace and solitude. 

" I partook his solitude for many months : 
at sunrise we quitted our dwelling, and enjoyed 
the fresh air, and the view of the sky and the 
hills, until the sight of the first countryman in 
the vale below warned us to retire. On moon- 
light nights we sat there ; and, while she, lady 
of the night, moved slowly above us, and the 
stars txvinkled around, we talked, and, in our 
conversations of faith, goodness and power, his 
doctrines unveiled to me, what had before been 
obscure, and from him I learned that creed 
which you hold in detestation, but which, be- 
heve me, has much to be said in its behalf. 

" Look, dear Euthanasia, daylight has made 
dim the glimmer of your lamp, and bids me 
remember how often I have forgotten my pro- 
mise to be brief in my relation ; it is now al- 
most finished. I soon greatly loved my kind 
guardian ; he was the gentlest and most amia- 
ble of mortals, wise as a Grecian sage, fearless 
and independent. He died in torture: tlie 
bloodhounds hunted him from his den ; they 



96 VA LP ERG A. [Ch. IV. 

bound his aged limbs ; they dragged him to 
the stake. He died without dread, I would 
fain beheve almost without pain. Could these 
things be, oh, my preserver, best and most 
excellent of men ? It were well befitting, tliat 
thou shouldst die thus, and that I lived, and 
still live. 

" It were tedious to relate how all this pass- 
ed ; how I wept and prayed ; how I escaped, 
and, hMf maddened by this misery, cursed the 
creation and its cruel laws. The rest is all 
uninteresting; I was returning from the task 
of carrying the last legacy of this old man to 
his daughter at Genoa, when I was seized- in 
this town by the Inquisitors, and cast into 
prison,- ' you know the rest. 

" And now, dearest friend, leave me. Hav- 
ing related the events of my past life, it makes 
me look on towards the future ; it is not enough 
to rise every day, and then lie down to sleep ; 
I would look on what I may become with 
firmness ; I know that no creature in the whole 
world is so miserable as I ; but I have not yet 
drained the cup of life ; something still remains 
to be done. 



Ch. IV.] VALPERGA. 97 

" Yet one word, my Euthanasia, of Him 
who is the law of my life ; and yet I dare not 
sav what 1 thought of saying. You write to 
him about me sometimes ; do you not ? You 
may still ; I would not check you in this, la 
truth he is the master of my fate; and it were 
well that he knew all that relates to me." 

Poor Beatrice then wept bitterly ; but she 
waved her hand in sign that she would be left 
alone; and Euthanasia retired. She had not 
slept the whole night, but she felt no inclination 
to rest. The last words of Beatrice seemed to 
imply that she wished that Castruccio should 
know her story ; so she sat down, and wrote 
an abstract of it, while her eyes often filled 
with tears, as she related the wondrous mise- 
ries of the ill-fated prophetess. 



VOL. III. 



93 VALPERGA. [Ch. V. 



CHAPTER V. 

Beatrice resokes to take the VeiL^-^Euthana- 
sia visits Florence. 

On the following day Beatrice seemed far 
more calm. Euthanasia had feared, that the 
reviving the memory of past sorrows, might 
awaken the frenzy from which she had before 
suffered ; but it was not so. She had pined for 
confidence ; her heart was too big to close up 
in secrecy all the mighty store of unhappiness 
to which it was conscious ; but, having now 
communicated the particulars to another, she 
felt somewhat relieved. She and Euthanasia 
walked up and down the overgrown paths of 
the palace-garden ; and, as Beatrice held her 
friend*s hand, after a silence of a few minutes 
she said : 

'' I do not like to pry into the secrets of my 



Ch. v.] VALPERGA. 99 

own heart ; and yet I am ever impelled to do 
it. I was about to compare it to this unweed- 
ed garden ; but here all is still ; and the pro- 
gress of hte, be it beautiful or evil, goes on in 
peace : in my soul all jars, — one thought strikes 
against another, and produces most vile dis- 
cord. Sometimes for a moment this ceases ; 
and would that that state of peace would en- 
dure for ever : but, crash ! — comes in the stroke 
of a mightier hand, which destroys all harmony 
and melody, alas! that may be found in your 
gentler heart ; in mine all recollection of it even 
is extinct." 

"I will tell you how this is, my sweet Bea- 
trice," replied Euthanasia, playfully. " I will 
tell you what the human mind is; and you 
shall learn to regulate its various powers. The 
human soul, dear girl, is a vast cave, in which 
many powers sit and live. First, Conscious- 
ness is as a centinel at the entrance ; and near 
him wait Joy and Sorrow, Love and Hate, and 
all the quick sensations that through his means 
gain entrance into our hearts. 

" In the vestibule of this cavern, still illu- 
mined by the light of day, sit Memory with 
F 2 



100 VALPERGA. [Ch. V. 

banded eyes, grave Judgement bearing her 
scales, and Reason in a lawyer's gown. Hope 
and Fear dwell there, hand in hand, twin sis- 
ters ; the first (the elder by some brief mo- 
ments, of ruddy complexion, firm step, eyes 
eagerly looking forward, and lips apart in ear- 
nest expectation,) would often hurry on to take 
her seat beside Joy ; if she were not iield back 
by Fear, tlie younger born j \vho, pale and 
trembling, would as often fly, if Hope held not 
her hand, and supported her ; her eyes are 
ever turned back to appeal to Memory, and 
you may see her heart beat through her dun 
robe. Religion dwells there also, and Charity, 
or sometimes in their place, their counterfeits 
or opposites, Hypocrisy, Avarice and Cruelty. 

" Within, excluded from the light of day. 
Conscience sits, who can see indeed, as an owl, 
in the dark. His temples are circled by a di- 
adem of thorns, and in his hand he bears a 
whip ; yet his garb is kingly, and his counte- 
nance, though severe, majestical. 

" But beyond all this there is an inner cave, 
difficult of access, rude, strange, and danger- 
ous. Few visit this, and it is often barren 



Ch. v.] VALPERGA. 101 

and empty ; but sometimes (like caverns that 
we read of, which are discovered in the bo- 
soms of the mountains, and exist in beauty, 
unknown and neglected) this last recess is de- 
corated with the strongest and most wondrous 
devices; — stalactites of surpassing beauty, 
gtores of unimagined wealth, and silver sounds, 
which the dropping water makes, or the cir- 
culation of the air, felt among the delicate 
crystals. But here also find abode owls, and 
bats, and vipers, and scorpions, and other dead- 
ly reptiles. This recess receives no light from 
outward day; nor has Conscience any autho- 
rity here. Sometimes it is lighted by an inborn 
light; and then the birds of night retreat, and the 
reptiles creep not from their holes. But, if this 
light do not exist, oh ! then let those beware 
who would explore this cave. It is hence that 
bad men receive those excuses for their crime?, 
which take the whip from the hand of Con- 
science, and blunt his sharp crown ; it is hence 
that the daring heretic learns strange secrets. 
This is the habitation of the madman, when ail 
the powers desert the vestibule, and he, find- 
ing no light, makes darkling, fantastic combi- 



1C£ VALPERGA. [Ch. V. 

nations, and lives among them. From thence 
there is a short path to hell, and the evil spirits 
pass and repass unreproved, devising their 
temptations. 

" But it is here also that Poetry and Imagi- 
nation hve ; it is here that Heroism, and Self- 
sacrifice, and the highest virtues dwell, and 
here they find a lore far better than all the les- 
sons of the world ; and here dwells the sweet 
reward of all our toil, Content of Mind, who 
crowned with roses, and bearing a flower- 
wreathed sceptre, rules, instead of Conscience, 
those admitted to her happy dominion." 

Euthanasia talked thus, trying to give biith 
in the mind of Beatrice to calmer ideas ; but 
it was in vain ; the poor girl listened, and when 
her friend had finished, she raised her eyes 
heavy with tears, "Talk no more in this 
strain," she said ; " every word you utter tells 
me only too plainly what a lost wretch 1 am. 
No content of mind exists for me, no beauty of 
thought, or poetry ; and, if imagination live, it 
is as a tyrant, armed with fire, and venomed 
darts, to drive me to despair." 

A torrent of tears followed these words ; 



Ch.V.] VALPERGA. 103 

and no caresses or consolation could soothe 
her. 

Soon after, Euthanasia received an answer 
from Castruccio to the letter in which she had 
sketched Beatrice's unhappy story. He la- 
mented the misfortunes, which through his 
means had overwhelmed the poor prophetess, 
" I know," he continued, '^ of no refuge or 
shelter for her, if it be not in your protecting 
aiTection. If she were as when I knew her, 
her own feeUngs might suggest a cloister, as 
tlie last resource for one so outraged and so 
miserable as she is. But she is a Paterin ; 
and, until she be reclaimed from this detestable 
heresy, she is shut out from the consolations 
of our religion," 

" And he writes thus coldly of this ruined 
temple, which was once all that is fair and 
beautiful ! Ah ! I wonder not," thought Eu- 
thanasia, " that he cast away my affection*, 
since he can spare no deeper sympathy for 
Beatrice. She does not interfere with his am- 
bition or his designs ; it is therefore hardness of 
heart alone which dictates his chiUing councils." 
At this moment Beatrice entered. To see that 



104 VALPERGA. [Ch. V. 

beautiful creature only (for beautiful she still 
was in spite of calamity and madness), was to be- 
hold all that can be imagined of soft and lovely 
in woman, soft and lovely, yet wild, so that, 
while you gazed with delight, you feared. Her 
low brow, though its fairness were tarnished by 
the sun, still gleamed beneath her raven-black 
hair ; her eyes, which had reassumed some 
of their ancient gentleness, slept as it were be- 
neath their heavy Hds. Her angry look, which 
was hghtning, her smile, which was as para- 
dise, all elevated her above her fellow crea- 
tures; she seemed like the incarnation of some 
strange planetary spirit, that, robed in flesh, 
felt uneasy in its bonds, and longed to be away 
on the wings of its own will. 

She spoke with trepidation : " Do not blush, 
my friend, or endeavour to conceal that paper ; 
1 know what it is ; and, if you care for my 
peace of mind, if you love me, if the welfare of 
my almost lost soul be dear^o you, let me see 
that waiting." 

" There is no consolation for you in it," re- 
phed Euthanasia, sadly. 

" Nay, of that I alone can judge ; look^ I 



Ch. v.] VALPERGA. 105 

kneel to you, Euthanasia ; and do you deny 
me P I intreat you to give me that paper." 

" My own Beatrice, do not torture me thus : 
if I do not shew it you — Never mind : here it 
is ; read it, and know what Castruccio is." 

Beatrice read it with a peaceful air; and 
then, folding it up, said composedly ; — " I see 
no ill in this ; and his will shall be done. It 
is a strange coincidence, that I had already 
decided on what he advises ; and I trust he 
will be glad to find that the wandering pro- 
phetess again seeks her antient path of religion 
and peace. I must explain these things to you, 
my Euthanasia. I know that you wish to re- 
move to Florence : I can never leave this town. 
I shall never see him again, hear him speak, 
or be any thing to him ; but to live within the 
same walls, to breathe the air of heaveti which 
perhaps has hovered near him, this is a joy 
which I will never, never forego. My reso- 
lution is fixed : but you perish here; and would 
find loving and cherished friends there, where 
he can never come. I would not detain you ; 
I have chosen the mode of my future destiny, 
and planned it all. The convent nearest to his 
F 5 



106 VALPERGA. [Ch.V. 

palace is one of nuns dedicated to San Mi- 
chele. I have already sent for the confessor 
of that convent ; through him I shall make my 
peace with the church ; and, when he believes 
me sufficiently pure to become an inhabitant 
of those sainted walls, I shall enter myself as 
a novice, and afterwards become a nun of that 
order. I intreat you, dearest, to stay only till 
my vows are made, when, wholly dedicated to 
heaven, I shall feel less an earthly separation." 

She spoke in a hurried, faltering voice, and 
closed her speech in tears ; she threw herself 
into Euthanasia's arms, and they both wept. 
—"Oh! no, unhappy, but dear, dear Beatrice, 
indeed you shall not leave me. I can be of 
little use now in the world to myself or others : 
but to cheer you, to teach you, as well as my 
poor skill will permit, the softest path to hea- 
ven, these shall be my tasks ; you shall never 
leave me." 

Beatrice di.sengaged herself from the arms 
of Euthanasia ; and, casting up her eyes, with 
that look of inspiration which seemed to seek 
and find converse with the powers above, she 
said: "I thank you from the depth of my 



Ch. v.] VALPERGA, 107 

heart, and may God bless you as you deserve, 
divine Euthanasia ; but I am fixed. Alas ! 
my mind is as the waters, now lashed into 
waves by the winds of circumstance, now 
coldly dark under a lowering heaven, but never 
smiled upon by the hfe-giving sun. And this 
perishable frame is to my soul as a weak, tem- 
pest-beaten promontory, against which the 
Libeccio impels the undermining sea. I shall 
soon perish : but let my death be that of the 
holy ; and that can alone be in the soUtude of 
a cloister : that is the consummation of my 
£ate» Oppose me no more : has not he pro- 
nounced ? And I will obey his word, as if he 
were my king, my lord, my Speak not ; 

contradict me not; you see what a fragile being 
1 am." 

And now this Beatrice, this Paterin, who 
had so lately with heartfelt hatred told the tale 
of all the miseries that are suffered under the 
sun, and cursed the author of them, became 
as docile to the voice of the priest, as a seven- 
years-old child. The confessor for whom she 
had sent, found it no difficult task to turn her 
mind to the reception of his tenets \ and prayer 



^08 VALPKRGA. [Ch.V. 

and penitence became again for her the law of 
the day. She never went out; she remained 
secluded in Euthanasia's palace ; and, witli 
her beads in her hand, her wild eyes turned 
heavenwards, she sought for peace, and she 
found at least a respite from some of the dread- 
ful feelings that had hitherto tormented her. 

In the mean time "the mother of the months" 
had many times waned, and again refilled her 
horn ; and summer, and its treasure of blue 
skies, odorous flowers, merry insects, and 
sweet-voiced birds, again bade the world be 
happy. The peasant prepared the threshing 
floor, choosing a sunny spot which he care- 
fully cleared of grass and weeds, and pouring 
water on it, beat it, till it was as hard as a barn- 
floor in the north. The ploughs, whose rough 
workmanship Virgil describes, lay useless 
beside the tilth, now filled with the rising corn : 
the primroses had faded ; but one began to 
scent the myrtle on the mountains; the innu- 
merable fireflies, loving the green wheat, made 
a second heaven of twinkling stars upon a ver- 
dant floor, or, darting among the olive copses, 
formed a fairy scene of the sweet Italian night; 



Ch. v.] VALPERGA. 109 

the soft-eyed oxen reposed in their stalls ; and 
the flowers of the chesnuts and oUves had given 
place to the young, half-formed fruit. This is 
the season that man has ever chosen for the 
destmction of his fellow-creatures, to make the 
brooks run blood, the air, filled with the carol- 
ling of happy birds, to echo also to the groans 
and shrieks of the dying, and the blue and se- 
rene heaven to become tainted with the dew 
which the unburied corpse exhales; winter 
were Bellona's fitting mate; but, no; she 
hangs about the neck of summer, who would 
fain shake her of}) as might well be expected 
for so quarrelsome a bride. 

Castruccio now possessed the whole territory 
of Lucca and several other circumjacent pro- 
vinces, in peace and obedience. But his eyes 
were always turned towards Florence; and 
his most ardent wish was to humble, if not 
possess himself of, that city. He made an- 
other step towards it during the summer. The 
abbot of Pacciana got by popular favour entire 
power in Pistoia ; he used this in behalf of 
Castruccio, turning out the Florentine ambas- 
sadors, and giving up to the prince of Lucca 



1 10 VALPERG A. [Ch. V. 

many of the strong-holds and towers of the Pis- 
toian territory. Castruccio was possessed of 
the fortresses placed on the mountain which 
overlooked the town, where he hovered, like a 
hawk over his prey, ready to pounce, delaying 
only for the destined minute. 

During this summer also he conceived some 
hopes of taking Pisa. The head of the govern- 
ment there, who reigned entirely through the 
afiections of the people, suddenly offended his 
masters ; he was decapitated; and the various 
parties in the town, running to arms, entered 
into a bloody warfare. At this moment Cas- 
truccio appeared with his army on the hill of 
St. Giuhano : this sight pacified the combat- 
ants; they elected a new lord, and turned their 
powers towards resisting the common enemy. 
Castruccio retreated to Lucca; but he was so 
moved by the overthrow of the Pisan chief, 
that, resolving to trust no more, as he had 
hitherto done, to the affections of his people, 
he erected in the same year a strong fortress 
within the walls of his city, which he called 
Agosta. He spared no expence or labour in 
it ; and it was considered by all as the most 



Ch.V.] VALPERGA. Ill 

•magnificent work of those days : it was situated 
in that part of the town which looks towards 
Pisa, surrounded by a strong and high wall, 
and fortified by thirty towers. The inhabit- 
ants of a whole quarter were turned out of 
their dwellings, to make room for this new 
symbol of tyranny ; and here he, his family, 
and followers, lived in proud security. 

Towards the end of the month of June, 
Euthanasia, who had hitlierto been occupied 
in attending to the sorrows of Beatrice, re- 
ceived information, that one of her most va- 
lued Florentine friends was dangerously ill, 
and earnestly desired her attendance. She 
mentioned this to her guest; and Beatrice, 
ever variable, was then in a docile mood. She 
had long listened with deep and earnest faith 
to the lessons of Padre Lanfranco, the confes- 
sor of the convent to w^hich she was about to 
retire. It would seem that this old man hu- 
moured warily and wisely her disturbed un- 
derstanding ; for she appeared at peace widi 
herself and others : if she now wept, she did 
not accuse, as she had before done, Him who 
had created the fountain of her tears. 



112 VALPERGA. [Ch.V. 

" Go, kind friend," said she to Euthanasia ; 
*' go ; but return again. Remember, I claim 
your companionship, until 1 take the veil,— 
then you are free. Methinks, I should like to 
be left now in utter solitude, I could commune 
more intensely with the hopes and heavenly gifts 
that I entertain. Go ; blessed spirit of Good, 
guardian Angel of poor Beatrice, poor in all 
but gratitude, — you shall not see your work 
marred on your return ; you will still find me 
the good, obedient child, which I have been, 
now, I think, for more than a month." 

Euthanasia left her with pain, and with a 
mournful presentiment; but, as all wore the 
aspect of peace, she thought herself bound to 
obey the voice of friendship, and to see, per- 
haps for the last time, one who had been the 
friend and companion of her early youth ; and 
she departed for Florence. There were for 
her too many associations allied to the Val di 
Nievole, to permit her to choose that route. 
Besides Castruccio's army occupied the passes, 
and she feared to meet him. She accordingly 
went round by Pisa. Nothing could be more 
beautiful than the country ; die low Pisan hills 



Ch. v.] VALPERGA. 113 

covered with chesnut and olive woods, inter- 
spersed with darker patches of pine and cork 
(while, among ail, the cypresses raised their 
tapering spires), and, crowned by castles and 
towers, bounded in a plain of unparalleled fer- 
tility. The corn was cutting, and the song of 
the reapers kept time as it were with the noisy 
cicale in the olive trees, and the chirping birds. 
Peace, for the first time for several years, sat 
brooding with outspread wings over the land ; 
and underneath their blessed shade sprung joy 
and plenty. 

Euthanasia arrived at Florence. She found 
her friend recovered ; but all her acquaintance, 
who had eagerly expected her arrival, were 
much disappointed when they heard that it 
was her intention to return to Lucca. She 
however both loved and pitied Beatrice too 
much, to be wanting in any of the duties of 
friendship towards her. After a month's resi- 
dence in her natal and beloved city, she again 
departed from Florence. In the mean time 
what had become of the ill-fated prophetess ? 



114 VALPERGA. [Ch. VU 



CHAPTER VI. 

Beatrice meets Tripalda — is led by Bindo to 
the Witch's Cave, 

The Albinois Bindo had been greatly struck 
by the appearance of Beatrice. There was a 
wildness in her countenance and gestures that 
excited liis curiosity ; and he seemed to feel 
instinctively that she had about her the marks 
of one who dealt with unembodied spirits. 
He had ventured to speak to his mistress con- 
cerning her ; but he learnt nothing except that 
Ferrara was her native town. With this slight 
information he visited his friend, the witch, and 
they canvassed the subject together. 

*' Her eye sees beyond this world," said 
Bindo; " if you were to look on her, you 
would find a companion in your art. I have 
discovered that there is a mysterious connexion 
betwen her and the prince : he liberated her 
when she was imprisoned by the Dominican 



Ch. VI.] VALPERGA. Il5 

fathers, as a Paterin, they say, but I suspect 
that it was for magic." 

" At any rate," replied the witch, ^' there is 
a mystery in this that 1 will clear up. I will 
go to Ferrara, and learn who and what she is. 
Expect me back in less than a month ; in the 
mean time watch her ; watch every word and 
action ; something may come of this." 

The witch went to Ferrara. She traversed 
the hills, and went by unknown paths, and 
across the untrodden mountains, guided either 
by her former experience, or by the arch fiend 
himself; for it required almost supernatural 
knowledge to trace her way among the heaped 
and confused range of the Apennines. She 
walked at night, and rested during the day, and 
saw the sun many times rise and set among the 
wild forests that covered the hills. At Fer- 
rara she learnt what she desired : Beatrice, 
the Ancilla Dei, the prophetess, was not for- 
gotten ; even her connexion with Castruccio 
had been guessed at; and some even dared 
assert, that she had never quitted Lucca, or 
the palace of the prince, during her pretended 
pilgrimage to Rome. The witch returned, 



116 VALPERGA. [Ch. VI- 

joyful to think that she had now obtained an 
instrument for some of her projects. 

What were her projects? They had not 
that settled aim and undeviating course which 
one object might inspire. H er desire was ma- 
lice; and her present hope, to impress upon 
Bindo some notion of the powers to which she 
pretended. She had been young once ; and her 
nature, never mild, had been turned to ferocity 
by wrongs which had been received so long 
ago, that the authors of them were all dead, 
and she, the victim, alone survived. Calumny 
had blasted her name ; her dearest affections 
had been blighted ; her children torn from her ; 
and she remained to execrate and to avenge. 

Her evil propensities had long exhausted 
themselves in acts of petty mischief among the 
peasantry ; but her connexion with Bindo gave 
her hopes of a wider scope for wickedness^ 
To injure Castruccio, or to benefit Euthanasia, 
was alike indifTerent to her. She saw and un- 
derstood more of the human heart than Bindo 
did : she knew, that Euthanasia had once loved 
tlie prince ; and injury to him she hoped would 
carry a double sting. She was old;^ perhaps 



Ch. VI.] VALPERGA. 1J7 

about to die ; and she thought that there would 
be a pleasure in expiring amidst the groans of 
the victims of her malice. 

In these days, when the passions, if they are 
not milder, are more restrained, and assume 
a more conventional appearance, it will be 
doubted if such fiendish love of mischief ever 
existed ; but that it did, all tradition and his- 
tory prove; It was believed, that the witch 
loved evil as her daily bread, and that she had 
sold her soul to the devil to do ill alone ; she 
knew how powerless she was ; but she desired 
to fill in every part the character attributed to 
her. 

As she returned over the Apennines, she 
planned her future conduct ; she thought she 
saw one mighty ruin envelop three master- 
spirits of the human kind, plotted by her alone. 
It was a dangerous experiment. " But I must 
die,'* she cried ; " and what death will be 
sweeter, even if it be in the midst of flames, if 
so many share the torments with me ? And 
thou, puny abortion, who darest with trem- 
bling hands meddle in work beyond thee, thou 
also shalt taste the poison so long withheld 1. 



118 VALPERGA. [Ch.Vr. 

A canker cling to you all ! I have long sought 
for labour suited to my genius ; and now I 
have found it." 

It was on the day previous to the departure 
of Euthanasia for Florence, that the witch re- 
turned : she met Bindo with a ghastly smile. 
<^ Ail," she cried, " is as you wish ; the star 
of Castruccio will be extinguished behind the 
murky cloud which this same Beatrice will 
raise. Bring her to me ; in time you shall know 
all : but be wary ; the countess must be blind 
and deaf to our machinations." 

Euthanasia had departed, leaving Beatrice 
far calmer than she had before been since her 
release from prison. But no feelings were more 
fluctuating than those of the poor prophetess. 
The day after she had parted from her pro- 
tectress, Padre Lanfranco had been called upon 
irgent business to Sienna ; and she was left 
without a guide to the workings of her own 
mind. She could not stand this ; the conso- 
lations of Euthanasia, and the exhortations of 
the priest were alike forgotten ; and Beatrice, 
turned out, as it were, without shelter, fell 
into repinings and despair. 



Ch. VI.] VALPERGA. 119 

She had ardently desired to see Castruccio; 
but her confessor had commanded her to avoid 
all occasions of meeting him, if she wished to 
fit herself for the holy Ufe to which she said 
she felt herself called. Beatrice was easily led ; 
but she had no command over herself; and, 
the moment she was left to her own guidance, 
she was hurried away by the slightest impres- 
sion. 

Castruccio had just returned from Pistoia 
on the news of the insurrection of Pisa ; and it 
Avas said that he would again quit Lucca on the 
following morning. " Now or never," thought 
Beatrice, " I may have my will unreproved ; 
if this day escape, I am again surrounded, en- 
chained ; I might see him, hear his voice ; oh! 
that I had courage to make the attempt ! Yet I 
fear that this may be the suggestion of some 
evil spirit; I must not, dare not see him/' 

She wept and prayed ; but in vain. In her 
days of extatic reverie she had sanctified and 
obeyed every impulse as of divine origin ; and 
now she could not withstand the impressions 
she felt. She wrapped a coarse capuchin 



1^0 VALPKRGA. [Ch.Vi: 

around her, and sallied fordi, with trembling 
steps, and eyes gleaming with tears, to go and 
gaze on the form of him for whom she had 
sacrificed her all. Hardly had she proceeded 
two paces from Euthanasia's palace-gate, be- 
fore a form — a man — passed before her, and 
wath a loud shriek she fell senseless on the 
pavement. She was brought back to the 
house, and carefully nursed ; but several &dy^ 
elapsed, while, still possessed with fever, she 
raved of the most tremendous and appalling 
scenes and actions, which she fancied were 
taking place around her. The man whom she 
had seen was Tripalda ; and from what she 
said in her dehrium, it might be gathered, that- 
he had been an actor in the frightful wrongs 
she had endured during her strange imprison- 
ment in the Campagna di Roma. She was 
attended on with kindness, and she recovered ; 
and such was the eilcct of her delirium, that 
she persuaded herself that what had so terrified 
her, was a mere vision conjured up by her ima- 
gination. She thought that the vivid image 
of this partner of her enemy's crimes, thus 



Ch, Vr.] VALFEllGA. 1^1 

coming across her while she was on the point 
of disobeying her confessor's injunction, was 
a warning and punishment from heaven. 

Euthanasia was away, and Beatrice dared 
not speak to any : she brooded in her own 
mind over the appearance, mysterious as she 
thought it, of this manj until her fancy was so 
high wrought, that she feared her very shadow 
on the wall ; and the echo of her own steps as 
she trod the marble pavement of her cham- 
ber, made her tremble with terror ; the scenes 
slie had witnessed, tlie iiorrors that she had 
endured in that unhallowed asylum of crime, 
presented themselves to her in their most vivid 
colours; she remembered all, saw all; and 
the deep anguish she felt was no longer miti- 
gated by converse with lier friend. 

*' Oh, cruel, unkind Euthanasia ! *' she cried, 
" why did you leave nic r My only hope, my 
only trust was in you ; and you desert me. 
Alas ! alas ! I am a broken reed, and none 
will support me: the winds blow, and I am 
prostrated to tlie ground ; and, if 1 rise again, 
I am bruised, almost annihilated. 

" Oh ! that I could die ! and yet I fear 
VOL. III. G 



122 VALPERGA. [Ch. VI. 

death. Oh ! thou, who wert my teacher and 
saviour, thou who expiredst smihng amidst 
flames, would that thou wert here to teach me 
to die ! What do I in this fair garden of the 
world r I am a weed, a noxious insect ; would 
that some superior power would root me out 
utterly, or some giant-foot tread me to dust ! 
Yet I ask for what I do not wish. Was he 
a good God that moulded all the agonizing 
contradictions of this frail heart ? 

" Yet hush, presumptuous spirit ! recall no 
more those lessons, which I hoped had been 
forgotten. Father! God! behold the most 
miserable and weakest of thy creatures ; teach 
me to die ; and then kill me 1 " 

She sat in the neglected garden of the pa- 
lace, on one of the pedestals which had been 
placed as a stand for the pots containing lemon- 
trees ; she leaned her head upon her hand, 
while the tears trickled down unheeded. It 
had been her delight, ever since her arrival at 
Lucca, to rove in this wild garden ; and some- 
times, when the sun had been long set, and 
the sound of the Ave Maria had died away, 
she would sit tliere, and, fixing her eyes on 



Ch. VI.] VALPERGA. H3 

the brightest star of the heavens, would sing 
the remembered melodies of her childhood. 
Nothing recalls past feeling so strongly as the 
notes of once-loved music ; the memory was 
almost too much for her ; and her eyes stream- 
ed tears, as she sang the sweetest lay that 
mortal ear had ever heard. Euthanasia had 
listened, she loved to listen, to her wild airs ; 
and, as Beatrice saw her own deep emotions 
reflected in the beaming eyes of her friend, 
she felt soothed. But she was now alone ; 
she felt the solitude ; she felt, that she sang, 
and that none heeded her song : but, as the 
violet breathes as sweet an odour on the indif- 
ferent air, as when the loveliest creature in the 
^vorld bends over it to inhale its fragrance ; so 
did Beatrice now sing in solitude, while, her 
heart warmed, her imagination expanded, and 
she felt a transport which was pleasure, although 
a sea of black despair was its near boundary. 
As she sang, Bindo came near her unper- 
ceived. He had never addressed her before ; 
and she had never observed him : she was one 
x>f those persons, who feel their own life and 
identity so much, that they seem to have no 
G 2 



1S4 VALPERGA. [Cb. VI. 

spare feeling and sense for the uninteresting 
events and persons that pass around them. 
He now spoke in a loud voice, arousing her 
from her deep reverie : 

^' Awake, prophetess ; it is not well that 
)^ou should sleep ; the spirits of the air have 
work for you ; all Tuscany feels your super- 
human presence." 

Beatrice started, and gazed with surprize on 
the being who thus addressed her : his dwarf- 
ish stature, his white hair and eyelashes, his 
pale and wrinkled face, and his light reddish 
eyes gave him a strange appearance ; he looked 
indeed like one of the spirits whose existence 
he asserted ; and she shuddered as she beheld 
him. 

" I come," continued Bindo, " from one, 
whose eye can see the forms that pass, to me 
viewless, through the air ; from one, who has 
thunder and tempest like dogs in a leash, and 
who can wind and unwind the will of man, as 
the simple girl spins thread from her distaff. 
1 bear a message to you." 

" Of whom do you speak ? I do not under- 
stand you." 



Ch. VI.] VALPERGA. 125 

" You will understand her words j for be- 
tween the gifted there are signs, which none 
else know, but which bind them fast together." 

" Are you one of those ? " asked the \vonder- 
iiig girl. 

" I am not," replied Bindo; ^'you know 
that I am not, though I did not tell you. Are 
you not Beatrice, the prophetess of Ferrara ? 
But my words are weak. There is one who 
lives in a cavern not far off, who was called, 
when young, Fior di Ligi, and now she calls 
herself Fior di Mandragola ; she rules the spi- 
rits who live about us, and is powerful over 
the seasons, and over the misfortunes and sor- 
rows of life. She bade me tell you to awake ; 
this night I will lead you to her ; and she will 
by her incantations take off the veil which spi- 
rits of darkness have thrown over you." 

" You talk of nothing ; who are you ? " 

'* I am a servant of the countess of Valper- 
ga ; nothing more ; a poor, ignorant, despised 
dwarf, a bhght, a stunt : but I am more pow- 
erful in my weakness, than they with their giant 
limbs and strong muscles ; — at least I have that 
strength, as long as I am obedient to her of 



H6 VALPERGA. [Ch. VI. 

whom I spoke. Tliese are the words she bade 
me say to you, — * There is a cloud over you 
which words of power can dispel ; you are 
that which you seemed, and not that which 
you believe ; — come to the cavern of Fior di 
Mandragola ; and she will restore you to that 
height, from which the ignorance of others, 
and your own want of faith have precipitated 
you." 

" And who is Fior di Mandragola ? " 
"A witch,— a woman with grey hair and 
decrepid limbs; she is clothed in rags, and 
feeds upon acorns and wood-nuts ; but she is 
greater than any queen. If she were to com- 
mand, this blue sky w^ould be covered with 
clouds, the Serchio would overflow, and the 
plain of Lucca heave with earthquake ; she 
makes men fear they know not what ; for by 
her command spirits tug them by the hair, and 
they shiver with dread. One only she cannot 
command ; one will, one fortune, one power 
cannot be controled by her ; but your star 
surmounts his. — So, come, that you may know 
how to rule him." 
" Whom ? " 



Ch.Vr.] VAtPERGA. 1^7 

*' The prince of Lucca." 

*' Away ! you know not what you say/' 

" I obey ; speak not of this to the countess ; 
I will be at your chamber-window by mid- 
night/' 

Bindo retreated, leaving Beatrice startled 
and trembling. She did not rely on his wilti 
creed ; but she felt as if it might be true. She 
had once believed in the command of man over 
supernatural agency; and she had thrown 
aside that creed, when she lost her faith in lier 
own powers. She ran rapidly in her thoughts 
over all that had occurred to her of this nature, 
her extacico, her delirious and joyous aspira- 
tions, — they were more dead and cold, than 
the white ashes of a long-extinguished fire ;■ — 
but other events had occurred, and she had 
felt inexpUcable emotions which seemed to link 
her to other existences. She remembered her 
dream ; and, covering her eyes with her hands, 
she endeavoured to recal what words and forms 

had been revealed to her on that occasion 

vainly ; the attempt served only more to shake 
a reason already tottering. It awoke her how- 
ever from her unbelief; and she again felt those 



1^8 VALPERGA. [Ch. VI. 

deep and inquisitive thoughts, that had for 
many years been the life of her being. She 
resolved to visit Fior di Mandragola ; she knew 
not why, but curiosity was mingled with the 
desire of change and freedom ; she thought that 
it would be delightful to visit at midnight the 
witch's cave, guided by the strange Albinois. 
Beatrice was left alone to her own reflections 
for the whole evening ; they were evei' dread- 
ful, except when the vivacity of her imagina- 
tion mingled rainbows with the tempest. 

Night came ; and, wrapping a capuchiu^ 
around her, she mounted the horse that Bindo 
had brought, and followed him across the 
country, towards the mountains which divide 
the Lucchese from the Modenese territory; 
the dark forests extended into the valley, con- 
trasting their black shadows with the dun hues 
of the low country; the stars alione keenly 
above. They rode swiftly ; but the way was 
long ; and it was two o'clock before they arrived 
at the witch's cave. It was a dreary habita- 
tion: and now, as the shades of night fell upon 
it, it appeared more desolate than ever; the 
pines made a sorrowful singing above it ; tha^ 



Cb. VI.] rALPERGA. 129 

fiarth around was herbless; and a few pine 
cones lay about, mingled with the grey rock 
that here and there peeped above the soil. 

The witch sat at the door of the hovel. She 
was a strange being : her person was short, 
almost deformed, shrivelled and dried up, but 
agile and swift of motion ; her brown and lea- 
thern face was drawn into a thousand Hnes ; 
and the flesh of her cheeks, thus deformed, 
seemed hardly human ; her hands were large, 
bony, and thin ; she was unlike every other ani- 
mal, but also was she unlike humanity, and 
seemed to form a species apart, which might 
well inspire the country people with awe. 
When she saw Beatrice, she arose, and ad- 
vanced towards her, saying, " What do you 
here, chikl of a sleeping j)ower ? Come you here 
to teach, or to learn the secrets of our art ? '' 

" I come at your own request," replied Bea- 
trice, haughtily ; *' if you have nothing to say 
to me, I return." 

" I have much to say to you," said jVlan- 

dragola ; " for I would awaken a spirit from 

lethargy, that can command us all. You are 

the mistress of those, of whom I am the slave ; 

G 5 



]30 VALPEUGA. [Ch. VI. 

will it, and a thousand spirits wait your bid- 
ding ; look, like subdued hounds they now 
crouch at your feet, knowing that you are 
their superior. It is my glory to obei/ them, — 
how far do you transcend me ! " 

" You talk in riddles, good mother ; I see 
no spirits, 1 feel no power." 

" And if you did, would you be here ? Here, 
at the cavern of a poor witch, who, spelling 
her incantations, and doing such penance as 
would make your young blood freeze but to 
hear it, just earns a power hardly gained, 
quickly to be resigned. But you could ride 
the winds, command the vegetation of the 
earth, and have all mankind your slaves. I 
ask you whether you did not once feel that 
strength ? For a moment you were eclipsed ; 
but the influence of the evil planet is well nigh 
gone, and you may now rule all,— will you ac- 
cept this dominion ? " 

" Your words appear idle to me ; give them 
proof, and I will listen." 

" Consult your own heart, prophetess ; and 
that will teach you far more tlian I can. Does 
it not contain strange secrets known only to 



CIi. Vi.] VALPERGA. 131 

yourself? Have you never owned a power, 
which dwelt within you, and you felt your own 
mind distinct from it, as if it were more wise 
than you ; so wise that you confessed, but 
could not comprehend its wisdom ? Has it 
not revealed to you that, which without its 
aid you never could have known ? Have you 
not seen this other self ? " 

" Stop, wonderful woman, if you would not 
madden me," screamed the poor terrified Bea- 
trice. " That is the key, the unbreakable link 
of my existence; that dream must either place 
me above humanity, or destroy me." 

" You own this power ? " cried the witch 
triumphantly, 

" Send away the Albinois, and I will tell 
you all. [At the beck of the witch Bindo with- 
drew.] Yet I gasp for breath, and fear pos- 
sesses me. What do you tell me of po^ver ? 
1 feel that I am ruled ; and, when this dream 
comes over me, as it now does, I am no longer 
myself. 1 dreamed of a flood, of a waste of 
white, still waters, of mountains, of a real scene 
which 1 had never beheld. There was a vast, 
black house standing in the midst of the water ; 



132 VALPEfiGiV. [Cii.VJ. 

a concourse of dark shapes Jiavered aboat me ; 
and suddenly I was transported into a boat 
which was to convey me to that mansion 
Strange ! another boat hke to mine moved be- 
side us ; its prow was carved in the same man- 
ner ; its rowers, the same in number, the same 
in habihment, struck the water witli tl:keir 
oars at the same time with ours ; a woman 
sate near the stern, aghast and wild as I ; — 
but their boat cut the waves without sound, 
their oars splasiied not the waters as they struck 
them, and, though the boats were alike black, 
yet not like mine did this other cast a black 
shaaov7 on the water. AVe landed together ; I 
could not walk for fear ; I was carried into a 
large room, and left alone ; I leaned against 
the hangings, and there advanced to meet me 
aaother form. It was myself; 1 knew it ; it 
stood before me, melancholy and silent; the 
very air about it was still. I can tell no more; 
— a few minutes ago I remembered nothing of 
all this ; a few moments, and 1 distinctly re- 
membered the words it spoke ; they have now 
faded. Yes ; there is something mysterious in 
my nature, which I cannot fathom.'' 



Cfa. VI.] VALPERGA. ]3S 

Beatrice shivered ; her face was deadly pale, 
and her eyes were glazed by fear. The witcli 
had now tuned her instrument, and she pro- 
ceeded to play on it with a master's hand. 

" Heavenly girl," she said, " I acknowledge 
myself your slave. Command me and my pow- 
ers, as you will ; they will do all you bid them ; 
— but that is httle. There are other spirits, 
which belong not to the elements, but to the 
mind and fortunes of man, over which I have 
no sway, but which are attendant upon you. 
Fear not ! The revelations you have received 
are almost too tremendous for your weak hu- 
man frame ; but gather strength ; for your body 
and your spirit may master all the kings of the 
earth. That other self, which at one time lives 
within you, and anon wanders at will over the 
boundless universe, is a pure and immediate 
emanation of the divinity, and, as such, com- 
mands all creatures, be they earthly or ethereal. 
As yet you have seen it only in a dream ; have 
faith, and the consciousness of its presence will 
visit your waking reveries." 

Beatrice sighed deeply, and said : " I was 
in hope that my part was done, and that I 



134 VALPERGA. [Ch. VI. 

should die without more agitation and fear ; 
but I am marked, and cannot combat with my 
destiny. Strange as is the tale which 1 have 
just related, I cannot believe what you say: 
and, though doubtless there are other exist- 
ences, of which we know nothing, yet I do not 
believe that we can have communication with, 
and far less power over them. I would fain 
preserve the little reason I have still left me ; 
and that tells me that what you say is false." 
. " But if I can prove it to be true r '' 
. "How?" 

" Ask what you will ! Would you see the 
cloudless sky become black and tempestuous ? 
Would you hear the roaring of the overflow- 
ing waters, or see the animals of the forest con- 
gregate at my feet ? Or, would you exert your 
own power ? Would you draw towards you by 
your powerful incantations, one whom you 
wish to see, and who must obey your call ? If 
you speak, all must obey ; the prince himself, 
the victorious Castruccio, could not resist 

you." 

The burning cheeks, and flashing eyes of 
the prophetess, shewed the agitation tliat this 



Ch. VI.] VALPERGA. }S3 

proposal excited in her heart. Poor girl ! she 
still loved ; that wound still festered, ever un- 
healed. She would have risked her soul, to 
gain a moment's power over Castruccio. She 
paused ; and then said, " In three days I will 
tell you what I wish, and what I will do." 

'* In the mean time swear never to reveal 
this visit, this cavern, or my name : swear by 
yourself." 

" A foolish vow, — by myself I swear." 
" Enough ; you dare not break that oath." 
The witch retreated into her cave; and Bindo 
came forward to conduct Beatrice home. She 
was faint and tired ; and day dawned before 
they arrived at the palace of Euthanasia. 

The three following days were days of doubt 
and trepidation for the unfortunate Beatrice. 
At one moment she utterly discredited the pre- 
tensions of Mandragola ; but then her imagi- 
nation, that evil pilot for her, suggested. Yet, 
if it should be so! and then she would picture 
forth the scenes she desired, until she gasped 
with expectation. At last, she thought, — 
** There will be no harm in the experiment ; if 
her promises are vain, no injury will result; — 



336 VALPERGA. [Ch. VI. 

if true— To be sure I know they are not ; but 
something will happen, and at least I will try, 

" I know that Euthanasia, and more than 
she, Padre Lanfranco, would tell me, that, if 
true, this woman deals with the devil, and that 
I, who have lately saved ray soul from his 
grasp, should beware of trusting myself within 
his reach. All this is well to children and old 
women ; but I have already tempted the pow- 
ers above me too far to flinch now^. Am 1 not, 
was I not, a Paterin ? Euthanasia, w^ho has 
never wandered from the straight line of her 
duty, and Lanfranco, who has learned his mo- 
rality in a cloister, cannot know what it most 
becomes an excommunicated wretch like me 
to do. 

" Yet I am very ungrateful and wicked, 
when I say this ; ungrateful to their prayers, 
wicked in transgressing the laws which God 
has promulgated. 

" What does this woman say ? that I shall 
see him, that he will obey my voice, and that^ 
not by magic art, but by that innate power, 
which, by the order of the universe, one spirit 
possesses over another : — that I shall see him, 



Ch. VI.] VALPERGA. 13? 

as I have seen him ! — Oh, saints of heaven, suf- 
fer me not to be tempted thus ! But no, — the 
heavenly powers deign not to interfere ; they 
know my weakness, my incapacity to resist, — 
but, like most careless guardians, they permit 
that to approach which must overcome me» 
I am resolved ; she shall guide me ; if nothing 
come (as most surely nothing will come), it 
imports not. And, if I am destined for one 
moment more in this most wretched life to taste 
of joy, otliers may (but 1 will not) dash the in- 
toxicating draught away." 

She thought ihus, and spoke thus to her se- 
cret mind , but every hour her resolution fluc- 
tuated, and rem'orse, hope, and dread possess- 
ed her by turns. She feared to be alone ; but 
the presence of an indifferent person made her 
nerves tremble with the restraint she was 
obliged to keep upon lierself. There seemed 
some link of confidence between her and Bin- 
do; and she called for him to dispel the appall- 
ing sensations with which solitude inspired her. 
He came ; and his conversation only tended 
to increase her chaos of conflicting thoughts. 
He related the wonderful exploits of Mandra- 



138 VALPERGA, [Ch. VI. 

gola ; how he had seen her call lightning and 
cloud from the south, and how at her bidding 
the soft western wind would suddenly arise, and 
dispel the wondrous tempests she had brew- 
ed ; how the planet of night obeyed her, and 
that, once during the full moon, this planet had 
suddenly deserted the sky, but that, while the 
heavens were blank and rayless, its image con- 
tinued to lie placidly in the stream near which 
they stood. He related the strange effects she 
had produced upon the minds of men, forcing 
them most unwillingly to do her pleasure ; at 
other times depriving them of their senses, so 
that for many hours they wandered about like 
madmen, until at her command their faculties 
were restored to ihem. 

Beatrice listened, half in disdain, half in fear ; 
her conclusion still was, — " The experiment is 
worth trying ; if her words be false, there is no 
harm done ; if true" — and then her imagina- 
tion pictured forth happiness that never should 
be hers. 



Ch. VII.] VALPERGA. 139 



CHAPTER VII. 

Euthanasia returns, — Beatrice meets the witch, 
a fid encounters Casiruccio and Tripalda.'-^ 
Di»sl 

On the third 'night she returned to the witch. 
" You need not speak," said Mandragola, " I 
!knovv your thoughts ; you hardly beUeve my 
words, yet you are determined to make the 
trial. It is well ; I should be surer of success, 
if you had imphcit faith in my powers and 
your own; but it is enough. What do you 
wish to effect ? " 

" First, mother, I must know what I can 
do.'' 

" Your power is almost illimitable ; but that 
of which 1 spoke, and that power which you 
prize most, is the power which you possess 
over the prince of Lucca. Do you wish to 



140 VALPERGA. [Ch. Vll. 

see him ? Do you wish in solitude, with none 
but me near, to see him come, to hear him re- 
new his antient vows ? " 

" He never made vows to me," cried Bea- 
trice angrily ; " he was bound to me, T thought, 
by stronger ties than mortal oaths ; that is past 
for ever ; but, except the salvation of my soul, 
I would sacrifice every thing^ to see him once 
again, divested of the ceremonial of power, 
listening to what will never be told, consoling 
her who can never be consoled." 

" That is easy work," said the witch, with 
alacrity ; ^' but first swear, swear by all that 
you hold sacred in the world, by your life, by 
hi«, that you will never disclose this conversa- 
tion, or what I shall now reveal to you, or hint 
in any manner the work we shall undertake/' 

Beatrice shivered ; she could no longer 
stand, she sunk to the ground : the witch went 
into the hut, and brought her a bowl of water ; 
Beatrice put it to her lips ; then suddenly with- 
drawing it, she cried, — *' You have given me 
a poisonous drug, either to kill me, or under- 
mine my understanding ; — dare you thus trifle 
with me ? " 



Ch.VIlJ VALPERGA. 141 

The witch took the bowl from her hand, 
and drank the liquid it contained : " Take 
shame for your mistrust," she said ; " this was 
pure water from the spring ; and, except that 
the charmed moon-beams sleep on it, even 
when you see not the moon in the sky, it does 
not difier from the waters of any other fountain. 
Now speak ; do you swear secrecy ? " 

Again the prophetess paused. But curiosity 
and hope hurried her beyond discretion; and 
with folded hands placed between the dry and 
skinny palms of the witch, she pronounced the 
vow that was dictated. 

Mandragola then said : " This satisfies me. 
The moon is now on the wane : when she fills 
again, I will send Bindo to inform you what 
is to be done. Fear not, but that all will be 
well." 

Beatrice returned to Lucca. Her glaze I 
eyes and pale cheeks told that the spirit which 
animated her now found nor rest nor hope 
She dreaded to look forward to the fearful trial 
she was about to make; and yet she could 
think of nothing else. Her rosary was thrown 
aside; her prayers were forgotten; and love 



142 VALPERGA. [Ch. VJI. 

again reassunied his throne in her heart. Her 
reason was disturbed by doubt and fear; and 
she often sat whole hours, her eye fixed upon 
the earth, lier parted hps pale, her hands closed 
with convulsive strength, as she tried to reason 
herself into disbelief concerning the promises 
and assertions of Mandragola. It was too 
much for her weak frame ; if the witch had 
been near her to mark the wasting of her fa- 
culties, she might have wound her plot so as 
to inspire her with some courage : but no one 
was near except Bindo ; and he by his tales, 
and his own fears and belief, only increased 
the combat of feelings to which the prophetess 
w as a prey. 

Euthanasia returned from Florence. She 
was much disappointed, much grieved, to find 
her friend far worse both in body and mind, 
than when she left her. More than all wild- 
ness of words and manner, she feared her si- 
lence and reserve, so very unlike her latest dis- 
position. If the convent, or her future plan* 
were named, she listened calmly, but did not 
reply; no intreaties could persuade her to give 
words to that which preyed upon her mind. 



Ch. VII.] VALPERGA. 143 

She would weep; and then, flying from the 
affectionate reproaches of her protectress, she 
would shut herself up to grieve alone, or far 
more dangerously to dream of the return of 
love and joy. Euthanasia reasoned, persuaded, 
intreated, but vainly ; accustomed to the ca- 
prices of this unfortunate girl, she saw nothing 
in what now occurred, that appeared to arise 
from any external impulse ; and she hoped that 
indulgence and kindness would in time restore 
her to her former calm. She reproached her- 
self for having left her ; and she resolved that, 
unless indeed Beatrice took the veil, which 
now seemed doubtful, she would never again 
separate lierself from her. She loved her ten- 
derly, and pitied her so truly, that she was 
\vilHng to sacrifice all her own hopes of future 
peace to soothe and restore her to some degree 
of happiness. 

Her endeavours were useless. The melan- 
choly of poor Beatrice was undissipated by the 
slightest gleam of tranquillity : for five days 
she had not spoken, and had hardly touched 
any food. Euthanasia tried in vain to console 
her, and, hopeless of good, sought to excite any 



144 VALPEUGA. [Ch. Vir. 

passion that might rouse her from her mute 
reveries ; she spoke not, but wandered restless- 
ly from room to room, or among the wild paths 
of the garden ; and thence she would have es- 
caped into the open country, but that her weak 
limbs sunk beneath her. One night Eutha- 
nasia slept, when Beatrice suddenly entered 
the room ; and, twining herself round her neck, 
and wrapping the long and thick hair of her 

friend around her brows 

" Save me ! '* she cried, " save me from 
madness, which, as a fiend, pursues and hauntJ> 
me. I endeavour to fiy him ; but still he hovers 
near: is there no escape? Oh! if God be 
good, surely he will redeem ray soul from this 
curse. I would fain preserve my reason ; my 
lips are bloodless, and my hair quite grey ; I am 
a skeleton without flesh or form ; I am to what 
lives, hke the waning moon at noonday, which 
floats up as a vapour, and the blue air seems 
to penetrate its pale and sickly form. Happi- 
ness, beauty, love have passed away ; but I 
would fain preserve that without which I am 
as a poor hunted beast, whose sole repose is 
on the spear of the huntsman. Breathe on 



Ch. VII.] VALPERGA, 145 

me, Euthanasia, breathe on my hands, my 
eyes ; perhaps some portion of calm may flow 
from your bosom to mine. I only wish not 
to be mad ; yet, if what is said be true, these 
wonderful things may be, and I still sane. 
There, there, your hand is cool; press my 
head. I know you well; you are Euthanasia; 
I am Beatrice ; I may still be preserved from 
madness," 

Euthanasia wept; she folded Beatrice in 
her arms ; she placed her cool hand on her 
brow, and her pale cheek close to the flushed 
one of the poor sick girl. Beatrice rested a 
few moments in silence ; and then again she 
spoke, " It has been said, that I am a witch, one 
who has power over the elements, and still more 
over the mind of man. I do not believe this : 
once, I know, a very long time ago, I fancied 
myself a prophetess ; but I awoke from that 
dream many years since. Why then do they 
madden me with these insinuations? I will 
tell you. Euthanasia (sweet name, dear, much- 
loved friend), that sometimes 1 fancy this is 
true. — Oh ! that I could tell the heavy secret 

that weighs upon my soul ! I have sworn 

VOL. III. H 



146 VALPERGA. [Ch. Vll. 

they did not well, that made me swear : — yet 
there is some truth in what they say, doubtless 
there is some truth, and it shall be proved. 
Well, well ; I have sworn, and I will not tell — 
Good night, dearest; I shall sleep now; so not 
a word more ; 1 have reasoned with myself, 
and am content." 

Beatrice crept back to her chamber ; but 
Euthanasia could not again rest. She was 
amazed at her friend's strange words, and tried 
to divine whether they proceeded from the 
heated imagination of the prophetess, or from 
some real event of which Euthanasia was ig- 
norant; but she had no clue to guide her in her 
conjectures ; and it appeared to her most pro- 
bable, that Beatrice was moved by the sug- 
gestions of her own heart ; she could not guess 
the dreadful and maniac thoughts that really 
disturbed her, or the frightful incitements that 
had been employed to deceive her. 

A fortnight passed thus ; when the Albinois 
brought a message from Mandragola, bidding 
Beatrice repair that same night at twelve, to a 
wood about four miles from Lucca. At this 
time Castruccio was employed in building the 



Ch. Vir.] VALPEIIGA. 147 

tower of Nozzano, on a small hill which was 
surrounded by the wood chosen by the witch. 
The weather (it was in the month of July) was 
exceedingly hot ; the cattle panted beneath the 
sun ; the earth was herbless ; all life decayed : 
but delicious nights succeeded these oppres- 
sive days; and Castruccio was accustomed to 
repair, as early as two in the morning, to visit 
the fortress. Mandragola knew the spot near 
which he passed ; and she so planned her 
scheme, that her incantation should be wound 
to the desired pitch, at the moment when he 
should ride through the wood : and thus, to 
the simple mind of the Albinois, and the ex- 
alted imagination of Beatrice, afford a proof of 
the extent of her power. 

It is impossible to say what her object was 
in all this ; she might be merely instigated by 
the desire to excite respect and terror, and 
have trusted that this apparent confirmation 
of her assertions would enable her to acquire 
unlimited power over the mind of her victims. 
She did not intend on this occasion that Bea- 
trice should speak to the prince ; that she 

should call for him, and he appear, was sufii- 
H2 



143 VALPERGA. [Ch.VII. 

cient mummery for one clay : another time more 
might be done, and another step taken in the 
labyrinth of error and fraud. 

That same night Bindo tapped at the door 
of Beatrice's chamber. The prophetess 
opened it; — she looked aghast and wild, but 
spoke not. — ^' This is the hour,'* said the 
Albinois. 

" Wrap your cloak round you," he conti- 
nued, " that you may not be' known." Bea- 
trice did as he desired, moving her arms like 
inanimate machines, and turning her eyes 
around, as if she saw nothing. Bindo led her 
down-stairs; they quitted the palace by a small 
back door ; he made her mount a horse ; and 
they rode out of the town. All passed in 
silence ; Beatrice hardly appeared to know 
whither she was going, or why she went ; the 
bridle fell from her hands, and hung loosely on 
the horse's neck; but the animal mechanically 
followed Bindo's horse, which led the way. 

They arrived at the wood, and dismounted. 
Bindo tied the horses to a tree, and proceeded 
cautiously through the intricate paths of the 
forest. It was an ilex wood ; and the dark 



Ch. Vll.] VALPERGA. 149 

foliage canopied tliem above, while the moon- 
beams penetrated through the interstices of 
the leaves, and made a chequered shadow 
upon the ground, which was despoiled of its 
grassy covering through long drouth. At 
length they came to a more trodden road ; and 
this led to a kind of woody amphitheatre, an 
open space in the midst of the trees, one of the 
corners of which the path traversed, and all 
around the ilexes formed a circular boundary 
of ample circumference. At one of the extre- 
' mities, farthest from the path, w^as a fountain, 
which kept a soft murmuring all the still night 
through. Near this fountain the witch sat: 
she was weaving two coronals of ivy, and 
muttering as she wove ; Beatrice and the AU 
binois were before her, but she appeared not 
to notice them. Beatrice stood, her arms hang- 
ing down, her head fallen on her bosom in a 
mute lethargy, her cloak had dropt from her 
shoulders, and fallen to her feet; she was dress- 
ed, as the witch had commanded, in white: 
several years had passed since she had been 
thus habited, and her attire displayed the thin- 
ness of her form and the paleness of her wasted 



150 VALPERGA. [Ch. VII. 

cheeks; her hands were skinny and yellow, her 
hair perfectly grey ; a few weeks ago, although 
mingled with white, its antient colour was pre- 
served ; but since then it had quite changed ; 
her eyes were sunken, ringed with black, and 
rayless. 

AVhen the witch had finished her work, she 
rose; and, taking some of the water of the 
fountain in the hollow of her hand, she threw 
it over Beatrice, and then crowned her with 
one of the chaplets ; she placed the other on 
. her own head ; and then she said to Bindo :— 
" 1 am about to sanctify this place; you must 
depart." 

Bindo bowed assent, and disappeared.- She 
took up a curiously fashioned ewer of brass ; 
and, fiUing it at the fount, she walked round 
the amphitheatre of trees, sprinkUng the ground 
as she went, and muttering her incantations, 
till she came round again to the spot, where 
Beatrice stood, white, motionless, and silent. 
" You appear faint, daughter," she said ; 
" drink of this water." — She put it to the lips 
of her victim, who drank it eagerly ; and imme- 
diately a change took place in her appearance ; 



Ch. VII.] VALPEUGA. lol 

her eyes lighted up, her cheeks were flushed, 
the heavy chain of mortality seemed to fall from 
her, she became active and even gay ; by de- 
grees a kind of transport seized her, a drunk- 
enness of spirit, which made her lose all con- 
straint over her words and actions, although it 
did not blind her to what was passing around*. 

"Aye, mother," she said, "I know what' 
I come for ; now let us begin ; 1 am an en- 
chantress, you say ; I can conjure him to ap- 
pear, who before defied my powers? be it so; 
—•let us begin.'' 

" Listen/' replied Mandragola, " no art 
requires so much patience as ours. We will 
make our incantations ; and you will see him 
pass on horseback along that road : do not now 
seek to speak to him. Exercise your power 
moderately at first; and it will be greater after- 
wards : bind him now with a straw ; in time 
he will be inextricably enthralled. To night 
be it enough that you see him." 

* Jusquiamo [henbane : hebenon, Shalcespcar] was 
the principal ingredient in these intoxicating draughts. 
They had the property of producing madness. 



152 VALPERGA. [Ch. VII. 

" Enough ! oh ! I would lay down my life 
for one, one moment's sight ! " 

Tbe night was perfectly still; the air was 
sultry, and not a leaf moved : the trees, bathed 
as it were in the cold moonshine, slept ; and 
the earth received their moveless shadows on 
her quiet bosom. The fountain murmured on ; 
beside it stood the witch and Beatrice; — Bea- 
trice, her eyes lifted to heaven, her arms crossed 
on her bosom, her hair clinging round her 
faded neck. Mandragola was full of business ; 
she piled a small heap of wood, walking often, 
around it, singing or chanting strange verses, and 
scattering water and oil about her ; she drew, 
with a wand formed of a peeled chesnut-boagh, 
a circle which surrounded the pile and the spot 
whereon Beatrice stood, and commanded her 
not to pass the hne till she should give permis- 
sion ; since that circle would preserve her from 
the spirits that their terrible incantations had 
called around them. She then turned to the 
pile again, and placed on it incense and odo- 
riferous gums, and plants, and strange devices, 
cut in w^ood, or moulded in wax, which no 
one might understand : then to crown the work 



Ch. VII.] VALPERGA. 153 

she cut off a lock of Beatrice's hair, and threw 
it on the heap. 

She had just accomphshed this work, when 
a shght sound struck her ear ; " Now is the 
time ! " she exclaimed ; and she set up a wild 
song to drown the trampling of the approach- 
ing horses ; she lighted a torch, and cried — 
" This is your work, mistress of the powers of 
air ; light the pyre, and call thrice on the name 
of the prince of Lucca ! " 

Beatrice started forward with frantic haste ; 
she seized the torch, thrust it into the pile, 
which caught the flame, and blazed up as she 
cried aloud, " Castruccio ! Castruccio ! Cas- 
truccio 1 " 

And then, unable to restrain her impatience, 
she ran towards the path in which Mandra- 
gola had said he would appear. The witch 
called on her to stay ; but she was too decre- 
pid to follow swiftly to stop her : the sound of 
coming horsemen was now distinctly heard; 
Beatrice threw herself on her knees, in the 
midst of the path by which they must pass ; 
with flasliing eyes and outstretched arms, she 
gazed eagerly forwards : the dark wood covered 
H 5 



154 VALPERGA. [Ch. VII. 

her ; the moon beams fell on her ; and there 
she, once the loveliest, now the most lost, the 
most utterly undone of women, kneeled in fran- 
tic expectation. The horsemen approached ; 
a turn in the path concealed them, until they 
were full upon her; and then she saw Cas- 
truccio and Tripalda advance. Her brain, al- 
ready on fire with impatience, and her spirits 
exalted by the drug administered to her, could 
no longer sustain the sensations that over- 
powered her. The presence of Tripalda was 
to her the sign of diabolical interference ; she 
beUeved him dead ; that it was his spirit which 
then appeared ; and, if so, it was also an un- 
real form, the resemblance of Castruccio alone, 

that she beheld. She sunk in convulsions 

on the road. 

Castruccio, surprised at what he saw, leaped 
from his horse ; and his example was followed 
by his attendants. The witch, who had hi- 
therto hobbled towards Beatrice, seeing them 
dismount, endeavoured to escape; but Tri- 
palda, who, judging of others by himself, was 
ever ready to suspect knavery, cut off her re- 
treat, and ordered two of the servants to hold 



Ch. VII.] VALPERGA. 1^5 

her. She submitted quietly, but remained in- 
vincibly silent to all the questions that were 
put to her. Beatrice was carried to the foun- 
tain ; aod they endeavoured, by chafing her 
temples, and rubbing her hands, to bring her 
to life : the prince himself supported her head ; 
but he did not recognize her ; so utterly was 
she changed from what the prophetess of Fer- 
rara had been. Once she opened her eyes ; 
she saw the face of Castruccio leaning over 
her, and she smiled. Castruccio thought that 
he knew that smile ; but Tripalda, leaving the 
witch, pressed in among those who were about 
her. — No one who had seen him could ever 
forget him ; she saw what she believed to be 
the evil genius of her life ; and she again sunk 
into insensibility. 

In the mean time the Albinois, who had 
been lurking near the spot, hearing the tram- 
pling of horses, and the sound of men's voices, 
ventured forward. Mandragola saw him first, 
as he came into the moonshine from under the 
dark covert of trees. She darted for ward;, and 
cried aloud — " Fly ! fiy ! " Her words and ges- 
ture attracted the noticeof her guards, as Bindo 



156 VALPERGA- [Ch. VIT. 

turned about to obey her orders. They pur^ 
sued him, and easily took him prisoner. 

He was brought to Gastruccio, who in- 
stantly recognized him. " What do you here ? ^ 
he demanded. " Are you not the servant of 
the countess of Valperga ? ^' 

"lam." 

" Who then is this lady ? and how came 
you here ? " 

" That is Beatrice of Ferrara. I can tell 
you no more until she" (pointing to the witch) 
" gives me leave." 

The name of Beatrice was sufficient to 
transfix the prince with puy and remorse. 
" Beatrice ! " he cried, and throwing himself 
on the earth beside her, he kissed her hand 
passionately. Her faintness began now to 
(dissipate ; but her reason did not return. The 
first words she uttered were those of madness ; 
she raved of that which ever haunted her 
thoughts in delirium, her prison in Romagi\a, 
Tripalda heard the words, and started, as if 
he had trodden on a viper ; his sallow com- 
plexion became paler, — but Gastruccio did not 
attend to this, or make out her speech. He 



Ch.VII.] VALPERGA. Wt 

perceived her frenzy ; and, unable any longer 
to endure his remorse, or the sight of his hap- 
leis victim, he gave hasty orders that she should 
be conveyed slowly and carefully to the palace 
of the countess of Valperga, and her compa- 
nions be detained as prisoners ; and then he 
nxie off. He rode tov^ards Lucca ; and, re- 
flecting on the fright that Euthanasia might 
sustain if she saw her unhappy friend brought 
home in so miserable a state, he resolved to go 
first to her palace, and inform her of what had 
passed. 

"And are you come to this, lovely Bea- 
trice ? " he thought. " And is this the same 
creature, who, radiant with beauty and joy, for- 
merly gave me her benediction at the palace 
of the good old Marsilio? I remember that 
day, as if it were yesterday ; and now I find 
her with grey hairs and a wasted form, a young 
fruit utterly blighted, and, worse than all, her 
reason fallen the victim of her misery. Am I 
the cause of this ?" 

He rode on swiftly, and soon arrived at the 
palace. He did not reflect that he was going 
to behold Euthanasia, the beautiful and be- 



15€i VALPERGA. [Ch. VII. 

loved ; and thinking of nothing but Beatrice, 
and finding the gates open, he entered. It 
was about three in the morning. During the 
night Euthanasia had thought that she heard 
a groan come from the chamber of Beatrice ; 
and she hastened thither, to discover if any new 
sorrow disturbed her unfortunate guest. The 
chamber was empty ; the bed unslept upon ; 
she sought her in the adjoining rooms ; and, 
not finding her, she became terrified, and, 
rousing the house, had the palace searched, 
but in vain ; no trace of her was left. She 
sent several messengers to different gates of Uie 
town to learn whether she had been seen, and 
waited with inexpressible anxiety for their re- 
turn. 

The prince found men consulting together 
in the gieat hall ; and the first words he heard 
was the name of " Madonna Beatrice." 

^^ Do not be alarmed," he said, coming for- 
ward. '' I know where she is, and she will 
soon be here ; some of you see that her couch 
be prepared, and seek a physician, for she is 
very ill. Where is the countess ? *' 

Appearing tlms unexpectedly and alone, the 



Cii. VII.] VALPERGA,. 159 

men did npt recognize the prince; but the 
quick ear of Euthanasia caught the sound of 
his voice ; and, coming out of an adjoining 
room, she cried, " Do you then know where 
my friend is, Castruccio ? " 
, " I do indeed,'' he rephed : '^ and it is for- 
tunate ; since I may have saved her from evil 
hands. But I am perfectly ignorant how and 
wliy she came to a spot so far from the town." 

He related in a few words where and in 
what manner he had found her, and concluded 
by saying, " I leave her to your care ; I know 
how kind and generous you are. If she re- 
cover, I intreat you to inform me without de- 
lay of so favourable a change." 

As he said this, the trampling of horsemen 
was heard in the streets ; — he cried, " 1 dare 
not see her again ; farewell, Euthanasia ; pity 
her and me ! " 

He hastened from the palace, and in a few 
minutes after Beatrice was brought in ; her 
countenance was deadly pale, and her arms 
hung lifelessly over the shoulder of one of the 
men who supported her ; her hair was dank, 
and her garments wetted with the dev/ of 



160 VALPEIIGA. [Ch.Vir. 

morning; her eyes were open, and glared 
meaninglessly around. They laid her on a bed; 
and Euthanasia, approaching, took her hand ; 
Beatrice did not notice her ; she seemed to 
have lost all sensation, and the rolling of her 
eyes, and the convulsive gaspings of her breath, 
were all the signs ofhfe that she gave. 

Why should I describe the scenes that en- 
sued during the following days ? Descriptions 
of unmixed horror cannot be pleasing; and 
what other feelings could mingle to soften that 
sensation, on beholding the declining state of 
.poor Beatrice ? She never again had any re- 
turn of reason, nor did she ever sleep ; gene- 
rally she lay, as I have described, pale and 
motionless ; if ever she woke to sensation, it 
was to rave and scream, so that the hardest 
heart might have been penetrated with excess 
of pity. Some have seen, most have read the 
descriptions of, madness. She called upon 
Euthanasia, upon Castruccio ; but, more than 
all, she fancied that she was chained to her 
dungeon-iloor in her tremendous prison, mock- 
ed and laughed at by her keepers ; and some- 
times she imagined that these beloved friend* 



Ch. VII.] VALPERGA. }6l 

were chained beside her, suffering those tor- 
ments which she had herself endured. She 
never in her wildest sallies uttered a reproach- 
ful word against Castruccio, although it ap- 
peared that she sometimes thought that he ac- 
cused himself; and then with the tenderest ac- 
cents, and most winning sweetness, she bade 
him not grieve, and assured him that he had 
committed no fault. 

These intervals of raving were short and 
rare; and, as she became weaker, she still 
seldomer emerged from her state of insensibi- 
lity. She was evidently dying; the physi- 
cians gave no hopes of her life ; and the priests 
crowded about her. Padre Lanfranco was 
among them ; and he bitterly reproached him* 
self for having left her, and endeavoured to 
compensate for his neglect, by watching day 
and night for some return of reason, when he 
might ask whether she died in the faith of the 
church. This never arrived : but the priests 
were lenient ; they placed the crucifix on her 
breast, and she seemed to press it ; once, 
when the name of her Redeemer was mentioov 



162 VALPERGA. [Ch. VII. 

ed, her eyes lighted up, and a smile seemed 
to play upon her lips. She was so perfectly 
senseless, that this could have had no con- 
nexion with the words that had been used; 
but the charitable priests chose to construe it 
into an enternal assurance of the salvation of 
her soul ; and they administered the sacra- 
ments. She never spoke afterwards ; but day 
by day she grew weaker ; Castruccio sent con=- 
tinually to inquire of her state ; but he dared 
not come. Euthanasia hardly ever left her 
bed side; and she became as pale, and almost 
as weak, as the dying Beatrice. 

Such had been the effect of the witch's in- 
cantations. Beatrice had needed the tender- 
est nursing ; and she had received instead, a 
shock which saner nerves tlian hers could 
hardly have sustained. Yet her death was 
smoothed to her by the affectionate ministry of 
her friend ; and she at last lost all sense even 
of pain. She died, peacefully, and calmly as 
a child ; and her many sorrows and wrongs no 
longer filled her with anguish and despair. She 
died ; Euthanasia was beside her when she 



Ch. VII.] VALPEUGA* 163 

heard a gentle sigh, followed by a fixedness of 
, feature and rigidity of limb, which shewed 
that the mighty change had taken place in her 
frame. 

Tears and lamentation succeeded to her 
death. Euthanasia wished that her funeral 
should be private and unnoticed ; but Cas- 
truccio insisted that it should be attended with 
every circumstance of pomp used in those days. 
The room was hung with black cloth, and made 
as dark as night, to give brightness to the many 
torches by which it was illuminated. Beatrice 
was laid on a bier, arrayed in costly apparel, 
and canopied with a pall of black velvet em- 
broidered with gold : flowers, whose beauty 
and freshness mocked the livid hues of the 
corpse, were strewn over her, and scattered 
about the room ; and two boys walked about, 
swinging censers of incense. The chamber 
was filled with mourning ^vomen ; one, the 
chief, dressed in black, with dishevelled hair, 
knelt near the head of the bier, and began the 
funeral song ; she sang a strain in monotonous, 
but not unmelodious voice : the verses were 



164 VALPERGA. [Ch. Vir. 

extempore, and described the virtues and for- 
tunes of the deceased ; they ended with the 
words : 

Oime ! ora giace morta sulla hara ! * 

And the other women, taking up the bur- 
then, cried in shrill tones : 

Oime ! ora giace morta sulla hara ! 

Again they were silent: and the Cantatrlcey 
renewing her song, repeated another verse in 
praise of poor Beatrice. Castruccio had told 
her in part what ought to be the subject of her 
song. The first verse described her as beauti- 
ful, beloved and prosperous, among her friends 
and fellow citizens : " Then," cried the singer, 
" the spoiler came ; she lost all that was dear 
to her; and she wandered forth a wretch u}X)n 
the earth. Who can tell what she suffered ? 
Evil persons were abroad ; they seized on her ; 
and she became the victim of unspoken crimes : 
worse ills followed, madness and heresy, w^hich 
threatened to destroy her soul." 

The woman wept, v/ept unfeigned tears as 

* Alas ! she now lies dead upon the bier 1 



Ch. VII,] VALPERGA. }C)5 

she sang ; and the hired mourners sympathized 

in her grief; each verse ended with the words, 

Oime ! ora giace moria sulla bara .' 

which were echoed by them all, and accom- 
panied by cries and tears. 

She ended ; and, night being come, the hour 
for interment arrived. The censers were re- 
plenished with incense ; and the priests sprink- 
ie<:l holy water about the room. Four lay- 
brothers raised the bier, and followed a troop 
of priests and monks, who went first with the 
crucifix, chaunting SiDeprofundis. The streets 
through which they passed, were rendered as 
light as day by the glare of torches ; after the 
priests, came the bier on which the body lay 
exposed, covered with flowers; many of the 
young girls and women of the city followed, 
each carrying a wax taper ; a troop of horse 
closed the procession. It was midnight when 
they entered the church ; the moon threw the 
shadow of the high window on the pavement ; 
but all shadows were effaced by the torches 
which filled the church. Beatrice was laid in 
her peaceful grave ; and, mass being said for 
the repose of her soul, the ceremony closed. 



166 VALPEUGA. [Ch. VII. 

Euthanasia had not been present : and, al- 
though she longed for solitude to weep in peace 
over the fate of her hapless friend, she was 
obliged to receive the visits of the Lucchese 
ladies, who came to condole with her on thisr 
occasion, and perhaps to satisfy their curiosity 
concerning its object. The funeral feast was 
sumptuous and well attended, though few knew 
in whose honour it was given. Euthanasia 
shrunk from their questions, and was angry 
with Castruccio, that he should have placed 
her in so disagreeable a situation. It seemed 
to her better to befit the hapless fate of Bea- 
trice, that she should have been permitted to 
depart unmarked, wept only by those, who 
knew her worth, and who lamented her un- 
equaled misfortunes. It was tlie false pride of 
Castruccio, that made him think differently; 
and such were the prejudices of the times, that 
'his contemporaries would have agreed with 
him, that he had in some degree compensated 
for the injuries that Beatrice had received from 
him, by the magnificence of her funeral. 

After the ceremony was ended, Castruccio 
first thought of the two individuals whom be 



Ch. VII.] VALPERGA. 16? 

liad found in the forest with their victim. Man- 
dragola had preserved an uniform silence ; and 
no threats, nor torture itself, could induce her 
to speak. Bindo was formed of frailer clay ; 
she had charged him not to reveal what had 
passed, and had imprecated the most terrible 
curses on his head, if he disobeyed. He trem- 
bled ; but the sight of the instruments of tor- 
ture overcame him, and he confessed all. Man- 
dragola was condemned by the laws which 
then existed in every country against the dealers 
in the black art, and suffered death as a witch. 
Euthanasia endeavoured to procure the free- 
dom of the Albinois ; but in vain. He was 
confined in the dungeons of the Dominican 
convent ; he pined for liberty ; and in a few 
raonths he died. 

The tie which bound Euthanasia to Lucca, 
was now broken. For many days she sorrow- 
ed, forgetful of herself, over the fate of her 
friend. By degrees however the feelings of 
actual life returned to her ; and she longed to 
quit a town, which had been for her the theatre 
of tremendous misfortune. Two months after 



IGS VALPERGA. [Ch. VII. 

the death of Beatrice she returned to Florence; 
wiiere she found, in the societj of her friends, 
and in the cultivation of her mind, some alle- 
viation for her sorrow, and some compensation 
for the many evils she had endured. 



Ch. VIII.] VALPERGA. l6g 



CHAPTER VIII. 

CastrucMs Progress in Arms. — He brings 
Devastation to the Gates of Florence. — A 
Compiraci/ formed against him, 

Castruccio had now been lord of Lucca 
for six years, and had attained his thirty-third- 
year; his character was formed ; and his phy- 
siognomy, changed from its youhtful expres- 
sion, had become impressed by his habitual 
feelings. Constant exposure to the sun and 
weather had tinged his cheek with brown; 
which, but for that, had been deadly pale; for 
care, and the strong emotions to which lie was 
subject, had left their mark on his countenance; 
his eye had grown hollow, and the smooth lus- 
tre of his brow was diminished by lines, which 
indeed looked gracefully at his years, since they 
marked the progress of thought; but some, 
more straggling and undefined, shewed that 
VOL. III. I 



170 VALPEIIGA. [Ch. VIII, 

those passions whose outward signs he sup- 
pressed, yet preyed upon the vital principle ; 
his eyes had not lost their fire, but their soft- 
ness was gone. 

He was kind and even grateful to his friends, 
so long as he considered them as such ; but 
he was quick to distrust ; and cold looks and 
averted favour followed suspicion : if these 
were answered by aught but patience and sub- 
uiissioo, hatred quickly came, and that never 
failed to destroy its object. If he only suspect- 
ed, that was sufficient cause, that he who had 
become thus obnoxious to his prince should 
be told that it was his will that he should in- 
stantly depart from Lucca ; and the confisca- 
tion filled the public coffers. If he thought 
that he had reason to fear, the doom of that 
man whom he feared was sealed : he was cruel 
and unrelenting ; and the death of his victim 
did not satisfy him ; several were starved to 
death by his command, and worse tortures 
were inflicted upon others : — something of this 
^vas to be attributed to the usage of the times ; 
but cruelty had become an elemental feature 
of Castruccio*s character. 



Ch. VIII.] VALPERGA. 17l 

if he were feared by his enemies in open 
war, his secret policy was still more dreaded. 
He had not forgotten the lessons of Alberto 
Scoto ; and, as his attempt on the Ufe of the 
Icing of Naples might prove, his measures had 
perhaps been influenced by the counsels of 
Benedetto Pepi. He had many spies in each 
town, and collected intelligence from every 
court of Lombardy. Women and priests were 
his frequent instruments ; and even the more 
distinguished among the citizens were induced 
through his largesses to betray the counsels of 
their country. 

Such was Antelminelli, the some time lover 
of Euthanasia ; daring, artful, bounteous and 
cruel ; evil predominated in his character; 
and, if he were loved by a few, he was hated 
by most, and feared by all. His perpetual 
wars, which impoverished the neighbouring 
states, did not enrich his own ; his artful po- 
licy sowed distrust among dear friends, and 
spies and traitors abounded during his reign. 
In Lucca he was as an eagle in a cage ; he 
Kiad a craving that seemed to demand the 
empire of the world ; and, weak as he was 
I 2 



17* VALPERGA. [Ch. Vlir. 

in means and liopes, he made the nations 
tremble. 

The object of Castruccio's present policy 
was Florence. He proceeded by measured 
steps; but he was perpetually gaining some 
advantage against the rival state, improving 
his mihtary discipline, and prepaiing for the 
last assault. His first attempt was upon Pis- 
toia, and he carried this place by a double 
treachery. The Florentines took the alarm 
upon so disastrous an event ; and the pope 
sent to them Raymond de Cardona, one of the 
most eminent generals of the times, whom they 
immediately placed at the head of their ar- 
mies. Cardona crossed the Guisciana, and 
ravaged the plain of Lucca, which had for 
many years been unspoiled by the hostile 
sword ; but, when it became necessary for 
him to retreat, Castruccio by masterly move- 
ments intercepted his march, obtained a com- 
plete victory, and, after a short, but severe 
contest, took Cardona and all his army pri- 
soners. 

The battle of this day was called the field of 
Altopascio. Arrigo Guinigi was among the 



Ch. VIII.] VALPKRGA. 173 

slain; and his loss was grievously felt by Cas* 
truccio. The prince of Lucca had ever looked on 
him as a treasure consigned to him by his late 
father ; and, amidst all his faults, Castruccio 
preserved his gratitude for the lessons of that 
admirable man, and a sweet remembrance of 
the days of peace he had passed with him 
among the Euganean hills. He had loved Ar- 
rigo, as a dear brother, or a son ; childless 
himself, he sometimes thought, that, although 
there was small difference between their ages, 
Arrigo would succeed him, that his children 
would be his heirs, and that, if not bound to 
him by the ties of blood, yet they would look 
back to him with the same gratitude and re- 
spect, that an honoured posterity regard the 
founder of their house. . Ambition hardens the 
heart ; but such is the texture of the mind of 
man, that he is constantly urged to contem- 
plate those days, when his once over-awing 
sceptre shall have fallen from his nerveless 
grasp ; the worst usurper, as he advances in 
yea$:s, looks with tenderness on his children, 
who, in the peaceful exercise of power, are to 
efface the memory of the lawless deeds by 



174 VALPERGA. [Ch. VIII. 

which he had acquired it. Castruccio saw 
the son of Guinigi in this light, and he felt a 
pang of sincere and deep grief, when it be* 
came his turn to heap his grassy tomb, amidst 
the many others with which the plain around 
Altopascio was crowded, and to order the 
place where the remains of Arrigo reposed, to 
be marked with a sepulchral pillar. 

From Altopascio, Castruccio advanced with 
his army to the very gates of Florence. The 
peasants fled before him, and took refuge, with 
what property they could save, in the city ; 
the rest became the prey of the Lucchese 
army, who marked their progress by fire and 
devastation. All the harvests had been brought 
in ; but Castruccio's soldiers wreaked their 
vengeance upon the fields, tearing up and burn- 
ing the vines, cutting down the olive woods^ 
seizing or burning the winter-stock, and re- 
ducing the cottages of the poor to a heap of 
formless ruins. The country about Florence 
was adorned by numerous villas, the summer 
abodes of the rich citizens, ornamented with 
all the luxury of the times, the grounds laid out 
in the most dehcious gardens, where beauti- 



Ch. VIII.] VALPERGA. 175 

ful trees and flowers adorned the landscape, 
and natural and artificial rills and waterfalls 
diffused coolness in the midst of summer. 
These became the prey of the soldier ; the pa- 
laces were ransacked, and afterwards burned, 
the cultivated grounds covered with ruins, the 
rivulets choked up, and all that, a few day« 
before, had presented the show of a terrestrial 
paradise, now appeared as if an earthquake, 
mocking the best cares of man, had laid it in 
ruin. 

The army encamped before the gates of 
Florence. The remnant of the troops of Car- 
dona and the remainder of the citizens capa- 
ble of bearing arms, would have formed a force 
sufficient to cope with the army of Antelmi- 
nelli. But more than their declared enemies, 
the Florentines feared domestic traitors; so 
many of their first citizens were prisoners to the 
prince of Lucca, that they dreaded lest their re- 
lations might endeavour to secure for them their 
freedom even by the betraying of their native 
city. Day and night they guarded the walls 
and gates, and patroled the streets, each re- 
garding the other with suspicious eyes, and 



176 VALPERGA. [Ch.VIII. 

listening with fear and horror to the sounds of 
rejoicing and riot that issued from the camp 
of Castruccio. 

The prince, in contempt and derision of the 
besieged, encouraged every kind of pastime 
and insulting mockery, that might sting his 
proud, though humbled enemies : he instituted 
games and races, coined money, and sent con- 
tinual defiances to the citizens to issue from 
their walls and encounter him in battle. The 
men, too ready to seize the spirit of hatred and 
ridicule, amused themselves with casting by 
means of their balestri, the carcases of dead 
asses and dogs into the town. Woe to the Flo- 
rentine who fell into their hands; if a female, 
no innocence nor tears could save her from 
their brutality, and, if a man, if their insults 
were less cruel, they were hardly less cutting 
and humihating; to lead a prisoner naked 
through the camp, seated on an ass, with his 
face turned towards the tail, was a common 
mockery. Castruccio perhaps did not per- 
ceive the full extent to which the brutal fero- 
city of his soldiers, made drunk by victory, 
carried them; if he did, he winked at it; for 



Ch. VIII.] VALPERGA. 177 

he had not that magnanimity which should 
lead him to treat with respect and kindness a 
fallen enemy. 

While the Lucchese soldiers rioted in plenty, 
filling themselves even to satiety with the de- 
licate wines and food of the Florentine nobles, 
and consuming in a few weeks the provision 
of years, the inhabitants of the besieged city 
presented a far different spectacle. The vil- 
lagers, driven from their cottages, had taken 
refuge in Florence, whose gates jealously 
closed, permitted not the means of subsistence 
to be increased. In consequence of this, of 
the supernumerary population of the town, 
and of the unwholesome food on which the 
poorer classes were forced to subsist, pesti- 
lence and other contagious fevers, declared 
themselves : the streets were filled with mourn- 
ful processions, the bells tolled a perpetual 
knell of death ; the citizens invited their friends 
to the funeral feasts, but the seats of many of 
the guests were vacated by death, and the 
hosts who celebrated them had been invited 
to several similar commemorations. Every 
face looked blank and fearful. The magi- 
I 5 



178 VALPERGA. [Ch.Vlir. 

strates were obliged to interfere ; they issued 
an order that the relations of the dead were no 
longer to celebrate their funerals by assem- 
blies of their friends, or to toll the bell during 
the ceremony, so that the numerous dead might 
go to their long homes without terrifying the 
survivors by their numbers. Yet this law 
could not hide the works of death that were so 
frequent in the town ; the streets were almost 
deserted, except by the monks, who hurried 
from house to house carrying the cross and 
sacrament to the dying ; while the poor, almost 
starving, and often houseless, fell in the streets, 
or were carried in terrifying troops to the ho- 
spitals and convents of charity. And this was 
the work of Castruccio. 

Euthanasia saw and felt this ; and she felt 
as if, bound to him by an indissoluble chain, 
it was her business to follow, like an angel, in 
his track, to heal the wounds that he inflicted. 
Dressed in a coarse garb, and endeavouring to 
throw aside those feelings of delicacy which 
were as a part of her, she visited the houses of 
the poor, aided the sick, fed the hungry, and 
wotild peiform offices that even wives and mo- 



Ch. VIII.] VALPERGA. 17(^ 

thers shrunk from with disgust and fear. An 
heroic sentiment possessed her mind, and Hfted 
her above humanity ; she must atone for the 
crimes of him she had loved, 

Bondelmonti one day visited her ; she had 
just returned from closing the eyes of an un- 
happy woman, whose husband and children 
had fled from their mother and wife, in the 
fear of infection ; she had changed her gar- 
ments on entering the palace, and lay on a 
couch, exhausted ; for she had not slept for 
the two previous nights. Bondelmonti ap- 
proached her unperceived, and kissed Inr 
hand ; — she drew it away : " Beware ! '' slie 
said. "If you knew from whence I came, 
you would not touch a hand that may carry 
infection with it." 

Bondelmonti reproached her for the care- 
lessness with which she exposed her health 
and her life: but Euthanasia interrupted him : 
." I thank you, dear cousin, for your anxiety ; 
but you know me of old, and will not attempt 
to deter me from doing that which I regard a.> 
my duty. But, what would you now say to 



180 VALPERGA. [Ch. VIII. 

me ; for I perceive weighty thought in your 
overhanging brow r " 

'* Ann I not hke the rest of our townsmen 
in that ? You see, Madonna, perhaps better 
than any of us, to what straits our city is re- 
duced, while this Lucchese tyrant triumphs ; 
you perceive our miseries too well not to pity 
them ; and I trust that you are too good a pa- 
triot not to desire most earnestly to put an end 
to them." 

" My dear friend, what do you say r 1 would 
•sacrifice my life, and more than life, to be of 
use to my fellow citizens. CJod knows how 
deeply I lament their defeats and their unhap- 
piness. But what can be done ? An angel 
alone could inspire our troops with that spirit 
and courage, which would fit them to cope 
with the forces of the prince." 

" You say true ; but there are other means 
for overthrowing him. Consider, Euthanasia, 
that not only he conquers and despoils us, 
but that he is a cruel and bloody tyrant, ex- 
ecrated by the chiefs of our religion, feared 
and hated by all who approach him, one 



Ch. VIII.] VALPERGA. 181 

whose death would spread joy and exultation 
over all Italy." 

" His death ! " Euthanasia's pale cheek be- 
came still paler. 

" Nay, you are a woman ; and, in spite of 
your superior strength of mind, I see that you 
are still to be frightened by words. Do not 
let us therefore talk of his death, but only of 
his overthrow ; we must contrive that." 

Euthanasia remained silent. Bondelmonti 
continued : 

" Call to mind, Madonna, the many excel- 
lent and virtuous persons whom he has mur- 
dered. 1 need not mention your friend Leo- 
dino, or any other individual ; his enemies have 
fallen beneath his axe hke trees in a forest; 
and he feels as little remorse as the woodman 
who fells them. Torture, confiscation, treach • 
ery and ingratitude have gone hand in hand 
with murder. Before he came, Lucca be- 
longed to the Guelphs, and peace hovered 
over Tuscany. Now the first nobles of the 
land have either fallen victims to his jealousy, 
or wander as beggars in Italy. All that is 
virtuous and worthy under his dominion send 



'1B2 VALPERGA. [Ch.VIin 

up daily prayers for his downfall ; and that is 
now near at hand ; the means are ready, the 
instruments are preparing " 

" For his death?" cried Euthanasia. 

" Nay, if you intercede for him, he may be 
saved ; but it must be upon one condition.'' 

« What is that?" 

" That you join our conspiracy, and aid its 
accomphshment ; thus AntelmineUi may be 
saved, otherwise liis fate is sealed. Consider 
this alternative ; you may take a week for re- 
flection on what I have said." 

Bondelmonti left her. The sleep that had 
been about to visit l>er weaned senses, fled far 
away, — scared by the doubts and anguish that 
possessed her heart. 

She felt with double seventy this change 
from the calm that she had enjoyed for the three 
preceding years, into the fears and miseries of a 
struggle to which she saw no end. The ty- 
ranny and warlike propensities of Castruccio 
were so entirely in opposition to every feeling 
of her heart, that she would not have lamented 
his fall; especially as then perhaps she would 
have conceived it her duty to stand near him 



Ch. VIII.] VALPERGA. 185 

in misfortune, to console his disappointed 
hopes, and to teach him the lesson of content 
in obscurity. But to join the conspiracy, to 
become one of those who plotted against him, 
to assist in directing the blow which should 
annihilate, if not his hfe, at least all that he re- 
garded as necessary to his happiness, was a task 
she shuddered at being called upon to fulfil. 

No one can act conscientiously up to bis 
sense of duty, or perhaps go even beyond that 
sense, in the exercise of benevolence and self- 
sacrifice, without being repaid by the sweeterst 
and most secure happiness that man can enjoy, 
self-approbation. Euthanasia had devoted her- 
self for some weeks to the nursing the sick,, 
and the feeding of the hungry ; and her bene- 
volence was repaid by a return of heaUhful 
spirits and peace of mind, which it seemed 
tliat no passing circumstance of life could dis- 
turb. It was in vain that she witnessed scenes 
of pain and wretchedness j she felt that pity 
which angels are said to feel ; but so strange 
is the nature of the human mind, that the most 
unblemished serenity reigned in her soul. -Her 
sleep, when she found time to sleep, was deep 



184 VALPERGA. [Ch. VIII. 

and refreshing; as she moved, she felt as if 
she were air, there was so much elasticity 
and lightness of spirit in her motions and her 
thoughts. She shed tears, as she heard the 
groans and complaints of the sufferers ; but she 
felt as if she were lifted beyond their sphere, 
and that her soul, clothed in garments of hea- 
venly texture, could not be tarnished with 
earthly dross. All this was now changed. 
She fell again into weak humanity, doubting, 
fearing, hoping. 

When Castruccio's army removed from be- 
fore the walls of Florence, the gates were 
thrown open, and its inhabitants were relieved 
from the pressure and burthen of supernume- 
•rary inhabitants. But where did the peasant 
go ? he found his cottage burnt, his vines, his 
next year's hope, destroyed, ghastly ruin stared 
him in the face, and his countenance, reflected 
back the horrors of a long train of misery that 
he saw was preparing for him. Euthanasia 
could do little good amidst the universal de- 
vastation ; what she could do, she did. She 
restricted her own expenditure, and all the 
money she could collect, was expended on the 



Ch. VIII.] VALPERGA. 195 

relief of these poor people ; bat this was a 
small pittance, a drop of water in tlie ocean 
of their calamities. 

She was returning from one of these visits to 
the country, where she had been struck with 
horror to perceive the inadequacy of her aid to 
the miseries around her. A whole village had 
been laid waste, the implements of husbandry 
destroyed, the cattle carried off^ and there was 
neither food for the starving inhabitants, nor 
hope of an harvest for the ensuing year. She 
had heard the name of Antelminelli loaded 
with such imprecations as a father's mind 
suggested, when his children called on him 
vainly for food, and Castruccio the cause of 
this misery. " If God fulfils," she thought, 
"as they say he does, the curses of the in- 
jured, how will his soul escape, weighed down 
by the imprecations of thousands ? Yet I wilU 
i5»ot consent to the hopes of his enemies, nor 
be instrumental in dragging him from hia 
^eat of power. I have loved him ; and what 
would be just vengeance in another, would be 
treachery and black ingratitude in me. Ingra- 
titude ! And yet for what? For lost hopes, 



TBS VALPERGA. [Ch. VIII. 

content destroyed, and confidence in virtu-e 
shaken. These are the benefits I have received 
from him ; yet I will not join his enemies." 

On her return to her palace, she found Bon- 
delmonti waiting for her. " Have you de- 
cided ? " he asked. 

" I have. I cannot enter into your con- 
spiracy." 

^' Do you know, Madonna, that in deciding 
thus you sign his death-warrant ? " 

" Nay, cousin, it is ungenerous and unmanly 
to use such a menace with me. If he be doomed 
to death, which indeed cannot, must not be, 
how can I save him ? how can I, a wo- 
man, turn aside the daggers of the conspira- 
tors ? if it be not indeed by betraying your plot 
to him, a deed }ou may perhaps force me to at 
last." 

" I hape not, Euthanasia. For your own 
sake— for the sake of all the virtue that ever 
dwelt beneath the female form, 1 hope that you 
will not be led to commit so base an action. 
You cannot harm us. If you inform Antelmi- 
nelli that there is a conspiracy formed against 
him, and that I am at the head of it, you tell 



Cb. VIII.] VALPERGA, }%t 

him no more than he already knows. He doe* 
not need the lessons of history ; his own expe*- 
rience teaches him sufficiently, that the sword 
is suspended over the tyrant's head by a single 
hair. He knows that he has enemies ; but he 
has too many to arrest them all : he knows that 
his friends are treacherous ; but he will never 
guess who on the present occasion will turn 
traitor. He cannot be surprised, nor can it 
do him any good to know, that I am the chief 
conspirator ; I have ever been his open and de- 
termined foe ; and this is not my first attempt 
to accomplish his downfal. 

*^ As to what you say concerning my child- 
ish menace, you much misunderstand me when 
you call it a threat. The persons who must 
act in this business are Lucchese y I may di- 
rect their exertions ; but they are the actors. 
And, if you heard the appaUing curses that 
tiiey heap upon Castruccio's name, if you be- 
held the deep hate their eyes express when he 
is mentioned, their savage joy when they dream 
that one day they may wreak their vengeance 
upon him, you would feel that his life is indeed 
at stake. I do not wish him to die. Perhaps I 



188 yALPERGA. [Ch. Vlil. 

am wrong in this ; if his life be preserved, it is 
-probable that no good will arise from his down- 
fal, and that no blood will in reality be spared. 
But I have eaten at his board, and he has been 
my guest within these walls, so that I would 
preserve his hfe ; and 1 have pitched upon you 
as the person who can best assist me in this. 
W hat else can I do r I cannot go to Lucca 
to watch over and restrain the fury of his ene- 
mies; nor can I find one Lucchese to whom 
.1 dare disclose the secret of the conspiracy, 
and whom I may trust with the protection of 
his person. Indeed this task seems naturally 
to devolve to you. You hate tyranny and war ; 
jou are a Guelph, and would fain see the ene- 
my of your country, the author of the innu- 
merable evils under which we groan, removed 
from his government : but antient friendship, 
the reciprocal interchange of hospitality render 
his person dear to you, and your female soft- 
xiess, and perhaps weakness, would come in 
aid of these feelings. You are ^ free to go to 
Lucca ; you may mix the voice of humanity 
with the bloody machinations of these men ; 
you may save him, and you alone.'' 



Ch. VIII.] VALPKRGA. 189 

Euthanasia was deeply moved by the repre- 
sentations of Bondelmonti. But her thoughts 
were still confused ; she saw no steady princi_ 
pie, on which to seize, and make it her guide 
from out the labyrinth. She paused, hesi- 
tated, and asked again for a few days for con- 
sideration. And this Bondelmonti reluctantly 
granted. 

In the mean time Castruccio was engaged 
ia exhibiting the pomp of a triumph, which 
was conducted witli unparalleled splendour; 
and ip which, like a merciless barbarian, the 
prince of Lucca, led along Cardona and all 
the most eminent of his prisoners as the at- 
tendants of his chariot. 



VALPERGA. [Ch. IX. 



CHAPTER JX. 

Euthanasia Joins the Conspiracy ^--^TripaMa 
a Member, 

During this festivity at Lucca, every thing 
wore the face of sorrow and depression at 
Florence. The only circumstance that raised 
them from their ruin, was the commerce of the 
city; for, by means of the merchants, corn was 
brought from the neighbouring states, and the 
magistrates distributed it among the poorer 
peasantry. 

Euthanasia had listened to the intelligence 
of Castruccio*s triumph with unwilling ears. 
li seemed to her like the pomp of his funeral ; 
and she dreaded lest his person, exposed during 
the ceremonial, should be attempted by some 
of his bolder enemies. But they worked with 
a closer design. 

The tide of her sensations turned, when the 
conclusion of that day's pomp brought nothing 



Cli.IX.] VALPERGA. 191 

with it, but the account of its splendour and 
success ; and, when she heard that the prince 
was personally safe, she found fresh reason for 
regret, in the want of that delicate and honour- 
able feeling on his part, which above all her 
other virtues characterised her own mind. 

But, if she were disgusted by the low pride 
that Castruccio manifested in his treatment of 
Cardona, her feelings of horror and of hatred 
were called forth by the occurrences that fol- 
lowed. Four days after this scene Bondel- 
nionti entered her apartment: his manner was 
abrupt ; his face pale ; he could not speak.— 
When he had somewhat recovered, his first 
words were a torrent of execrations against 
Antelminelli. 

^' Oh, cease!" cried Euthanasia, "you hate, 
^nd would destroy, but do not curse him ! " 

" Bid me rather add tenfold bitterness to my 
weak execrations ; but all words man can pro^ 
nounce are poor. He has done that which, if 
he had before been an angel, would blot and 
disfigure him for ever. He is the worst of 
tyrants, the most cruel and atrocious wretch 
that breathes ! But earth shall soon be rid of 
the monster. Read that writing ! " 



192 VALPEUGA. [Ch. IX. 

He put into her hand a dirty scrap of paper, 
on which she deciphered these words : 

" For holy Jesu's sake, save me ! My mother 
does not send my ransom. I was put to the 
torture this morning. I suffer it again on Thurs- 
day, if you do not send six hundred golden 
florins. 
"Pity your Francesco BOxNDELMONTi." 

The paper dropt from her hands. "This 
comes from my cousin Francesco," said Bon- 
dehnonti ; "others are in the samesituation. 
Those who have not been ransomed, he has 
thrown into the most loathsome dungeons, and 
starves and tortures them to quicken their appe- 
tite for freedom. Shall such a one reign?" 

"I^o," cried Euthanasia, her cheek burniLg 
with indignation, and her lips quivering with 
excessive pity ; "No, he shall not reign; he 
were unworthy to live, if it be not to repent. 
Bondelmonti, here is my hand ; do with me 
what you please; let his life be saved; but let; 
him be torn from the power which he uses 
more like a fiend than a human creature." 

" Thank you, dear cousin, for this generous 
feeling: now I know you again. I know my 
Euthanasia, who had forgotten herself awhile, 



Cli. IX.] VALPERGA. 193 

only to awake again with new vigour. Call 
up all your spirits, Madonna; recollect all of 
noble, and wise, and courageous, that your 
excellent father taught you. This is no may- 
day trick, or the resolution of momentary indig- 
nation; it is the firm purpose of those, who 
see an evil beyond imagination pregnant with 
destruction and horror. Your quick conces- 
sion merits my utmost confidence; and you 
shall have it. To-night I will see you again. 
Now I must endeavour to borrow money to 
liberate Francesco, My purse has been em- 
ptied by the ransom of my three brothers, and 
his mother has three hundred florins only." 

" I can supply the rest/' said Euthanasia. 
^^ Poor fellow, send them immediately ; that 
with the shortest delay he may be rescued fi-om 
the power of one more remorseless than the 
rack on which he suffers. To night I see you 
again." 

Euthanasia spent the intervening hours in 
great agitation. She did not shrink from her 
purpose ; she had given her word, and she did 
not dream of recalling it. But all was turmoil 
and confusion in her mind. She figured to 

VOL. III. K 



194 * VALPERGA. [Ch, IX. 

herself the scenes that would ensue ; she ima- 
gined the downfal of him she had loved, his 

life saved only through her intervention, and 

he perhaps, knowing that she also had joined 
the conspiracy to despoil him of the power he 
had laboured to attain, would turn from her in 
abhorrence. 

As she thought of this, a few natural tears 
fell ; she cast her deep blue eyes up to heaven ; 
and tried to collect all her fortitude. Night 
came, and with it the hour when she expected 
Bondelmonti ; but all was tumult and uneasi- 
ness in her heart : and to all other regrets she 
added the startling doubt whether she were 
not on the present occasion quitting the path 
of innocence, for the intricate and painful one 
of error. Then she knelt down, and prayed fer- 
vently for a wisdom and judgement that might 
guide her aright. 

Euthanasia was now advanced to the very 
prime of life. Ten years had elapsed since 
she had first interchanged vows with Antelmi- 
nelli in her castle of Valperga; but her mind 
was of that youthful kind, that, ever, as it were, 
renewing itself from her own exhaustless trea- 



Qi. IX.] VALPERGA. 195 

sure of wisdom and sentiment, never slept 
upon the past, forgetful of the changes that took 
place around her. Her character was always 
improving, always adding some new acquire- 
ments, or strengthening those which she pos- 
sessed before; and thus for ever enlarging her 
sphere of knowledge and feeling. She often 
felt as if she were not the same being that she 
had been a few years before; she often figured 
to herself, that it was only from such or such 
a period that she obtained a true insight into 
the affairs of hfe, and became initiated in real 
W'isdom ; but these epochs were continually 
changing, ' for day by day she experienced the 
acquisition of some new power, the discovery 
of some new light which guided her through 
the labyrinth, while another of the thousand- 
folded veils which hide the sun of reality from 
the ardent spirit of youth, fell before her 
piercing gaze. Yet the change that she felt 
in lier faculties was greater than that which 
had really taken place ; it w^as only the disclo- 
sure of another petal of the blowing rose, bu t 
the bud had contained the germ of all that 
appeared as if new-created. 
K 2 



196 VALPERGA. [Ch.IX. 

With this raatured judgement and depth of 
feeling, she was called upon to take an arduous 
part in a most doubtful and perilous under, 
taking. The enthusiasm that distinguished 
her, had ever induced her to place a great con- 
fidence in her own sentiments, and the instan* 
taneous decision of any doubtful point ; and 
now she did not hesitate in resolving to become 
one in the conspiracy : her refusal would not 
stop its progress ; her consent would enable 
her to judge of, and regulate its measures. 
She no longer loved the prince ; his cruelty had 
degraded him even from the small place that 
he had still kept in her heart. But such was 
the force of early feeling, that she desired to 
restore her affections to him, when he should 
again become gentle and humane, as he 
appeared when she first knew him. Adversity 
might bring about this change. 

Bondelmonti appeared. He appeared with 
a face of satisfaction and even of joy, as he 
claimed her promise of the morning. She 
renewed it solemnly, while her serious counte- 
nance, and the touching modulation of her 
voice, told how from the depth of her heart she 



Ch. IX.] VALPXRGA. 197 

felt the extent and force of the engagement into 
which she entered. Bondehnonti then detail- 
ed to her the circumstances of the conspiracy. 

The family of the Quartezzani had been that 
which had most assisted Castruccio in his rise 
to power, and had stood by him long with fi- 
delity. But, as his tyranny became more se- 
cure, he feared their power, more than he was 
pleased by their support, and supected that 
they only looked upon him as an instrument 
to fight their battles awhile, and then to be 
put aside at the first opportunity. He changed 
his demeanour towards them, from that of friend- 
hness, to the coldest distrust, and took the 
earliest opportunity to banish the chief among 
them from Lucca. Disgusted by this ingra- 
titude, they withdrew from court, and tempted 
by the emissaries of Bondehnonti, now entered 
into a conspiracy against him, joining with the 
Avogadii, his professed enemies, to despoil him 
of power, perhaps of life. 

Bondehnonti explained to Euthanasia all 
the circumstances of the plan they had con- 
certed to get the city into their hands. The 



% 



198 VALPERGA. [Ch. IX. 

present governor of Pisa, who remembered, 
and hated the prince on account of the treason 
he had fomented against him, was to advance 
in a hostile manner to Ripafrata ; and, while 
the shew of force on that side should attract 
Castruccio and his army, a detachment was 
to cross the hill of St. Giuliano, and come sud- 
denly on the city, whose gates would be open- 
ed to them by one of the conspirators. The 
Florentine force would hover on the banks of 
the Guisciana; and, taking advantage of the 
confusion which the seizure of Lucca would 
occasion, would pass the river, and march di- 
rectly towards the city, declaring liberty to the 
peasant, and attacking the partizans of the ty- 
rant alone. King Robert of I^ aples had a fleet 
already in the gulph of Spezia, which^ on the 
news of the breaking out of the conspiracy, 
would disembark its soldiers on the Lucchese 
territory, and thus add to the general confu- 
sion. 

This was the outline of the plan ; there were 
many smaller circumstances which Bondel- 
monti detailed. He then named their asso- 



Ch. IX.] VALPERGA. 199 

ciates in the plot. In calling over the list he 
mentioned Tripalda ; Euthanasia's eyes flashed 
angrily at the sound of that name. 

" Tripalda ! " she cried, " Battista Tripal- 
da ! Is he one of your associates ? Nay then, 
I am truly sorry that I am now numbered among 

you." 

*' Why this passion, my fair cousin ? Tri- 
palda IS a man of infinite talent : his counsels 
have been of the greatest benefit to us. I do 
not think that our plot would ever have ripen- 
ed into maturity, had it not been for him. Of 
what consequence is the virtue or vice of a 
man on such an occasion ? Edged tools are 
what we want ; it matters little the evil name 
with which they may be branded.'' 

^^ You reason ill, my friend ; and, if you per- 
sist, I foresee the failure of our plan, and the 
destruction of those engaged in it. I have 
promised my assistance, nor will I shrink from 
the task imposed upon me; but I can no longer 
have faith in our success, if one so treacherous 
and unprincipled as Tripalda be admitted into 
a participation of our counsels. Accident has 
made me acquainted with the full extent of 



200 VALPERGA. [Ch. IX. 

his crimes ; it is the knowledge of them that 
has caused his expulsion from the palace and 
society of the prince, his crimes alone impel 
him to associate in this conspiracy, and they 
also ought to induce us to reject him ; tliat 
cause must be bad, which requires the assist- 
ance of one so wicked as this inndel priest," 

"You are strangely prejudiced, methinks, 
against this man," replied Bondelmonti, "but 
indeed, my dear cousin, such as he is, we must 
now tolerate him. He is not only acquainted 
with every circumstance of the conspiracy, but 
has been its most active member. Many of 
our most valuable partizans have been gained 
over by him alone ; he is the tie which binds 
those who are personally at variance one with 
the other, and the stay which fixes the fluctua- 
ting." 

"And this then is the trap into which we 
are about to fall ? This man hates the prince, 
because Castruccio is fully acquainted with 
tlie extent of his iniquity ; for the same reason 
he detests me " 

" This expression of yours," interrupted 
Bondelmonti, " proves the excess of your miiB- 



Ch. IX.] VALPERGA. 201 

apprehension. Sa far from disliking, he es- 
teems and admires you, and it was at his in- 
stigation that 1 first named our purpose to 

you." 

" All that you say, unfortunately increasee 
my distrust. But, if, as I believe, 1 have done 
well in promising my assistance, fear shall not 
withhold me from exerting my powers, and 
giving my whole heart to the undertaking. 
My dear Bondelmonti, you are the oldest of 
. niy friends, you were the friend of my father, 
I trust much to your judgement; I confide 
greatly in the sense of right which nature has 
implanted in my own heart ; I hope no false 
view, no veiled passion, misleads me now, 
when most I desire to act well, justly towards 
others, and towards myself: the catastrophe 
is in the hands of that irresistible Power which 
guides us all ; and, if we fail, no weakness, no 
vain reproach, or worse treachery, shall tarnish 
my defeat. Trust in me to the death/' 



R ^ 



202 VALPERGA. [Ch. X. 



CHAPTER X. 

Euthanasia remotes to Lucca. — Conference 
zcith Tripalda, — Tripalda turns Informer. 

One of the first effects of Euthanasia's en- 
trance into the conspiracy of Bondelmonti, 
was a journey from Florence to Lucca. It 
was necessary for her to be there some time be- 
fore the breaking out of the plot, that she might 
be able to take the part allotted to her. She 
quitted her native city with a heavy heart. It 
was at the end of the month of ]N ovember ; 
and the lowering skies portended rain, and the 
bare earth, stripped of its summer ornaments, 
appeared chilled by the cold blast that passed 
over it. The olive and ilex woods, and the 
few cork trees and cypresses, that grew on the 
declivities of the hills, diversified the landscape 
with their sober green : but they had a funereal 
appearance ; they were as the pall of ihe dying 



Ch. X.] VALPERGA. 203 

year, and the melancholy song of their waving 
branches was its dirge. 

Euthanasia's mind was no store-house of 
blithe thoughts. She felt deeply the danger of 
the project in which she had embarked ; and 
3^et its danger was one of the considerations 
that reconciled her to it. To have encounter- 
ed Castruccio with superior force, and to have 
despoiled him of all power with security to 
herself, would have been hateful to her feelings ^ 
and it appeared to her that in acting such a 
part she would have merited the disapproba- 
tion of mankind. But she approached the 
foundations of his power by a path encom- 
passed with danger^ she groped through the 
murky air of night, and owls and bats flitted 
before her, and flapped their wings in her eyes ; 
her footing was unsteady ; — a precipice yawn- 
ed on each side, and the probable result of her 
undertaking was ignominy and death. She 
felt all this. The name of Tripalda had ex- 
tinguished in her bosom every hope of success. 
She felt that the purity of her intentions would 
excuse her in her own eyes ; and she could 
thea endure with patience all of bitter and evil 



S04 VALPERGA. [Ch. X. 

that might befal her. She could not say in 
the words of the poet, 

Roll on, the chariot-wheels of my dear plots, 

And bear mine ends to their desired marks ! 

As yet there's not a rub of wit, or gulph of thought, 

No rocky misconstruction, thorny maze, 

Or other let of any doubtfulness : 

As yet thy way is smooth and plain. 

Like the green ocean in a silent calm *. 

No! the course she followed was a slippery 
path, that overhung a chasm terrible as death : 
the sea on which she sailed was rife with quick- 
sands, and its breakers threatened instant de- 
struction. 

Sometimes the memory of her peaceful life 
at Florence obtruded itself upon her, and more 
than that, her charitable occupations when she 
attended the sick in that city, and whence, as 
fron? a rough-hewn chalice containing necta- 
rian drink, she had quaffed happiness. Some- 
times she reproached destiny that she had not 
fallen a victim to her perilous exertions ; but 
}jhe endeavoured to shut out these remeni- 

* The Dumb Knight by Machin : Act iv. 



€h. X.] VALPERGA. £05 

brances from her mind, to look before her and 
not behind. What though dense clouds hid 
the future, and thunder muttered above ? she 
was borne on by a virtuous purpose, which 
would be to her as the wings of an eagle, or 
the sure foot of the precipice-walking chamois. 
And then, if the enterprise succeeded, she 
would save Castruccio. But for her he would 
be sacrificed by his insatiable enemies. But 
her hand would avert their daggers, her voice 
bid them " Hold ! " Her imagination pic- 
tured the whole scene. He would be seized 
by his enemies, and expect death ; he would 
be conveyed aboard one of the vessels of the 
king of Naples; and she would be there, to 
watch over and tend upon him. At first he 
might repulse, perhaps spurn her : but patient 
forbearance, and her meek demeanour would 
soften him ; he would see the tears of her de- 
votion ; he would hear her defence ; and he 
would forgive her. They would disembark 
on some lovely island on the sea of Baiae — his 
prison. A resting-place, whose walls would be 
the ocean, and whose bars and locks the all- 
encompassing air — would be allotted to him 



206 VALPERGA. [Ch. X 

on the island of Ischia. Thence he would sur- 
vey the land where the philosophers of past 
ages lived ; he would study their lessons ; and 
their wisest lore would descend into his soul, 
like the dews of heaven upon the parched frame 
of the wanderer in the Arabian desarts. By 
degrees he would love obscurity. They would 
behold together the wondrous glories of the 
heavens, and the beauty of that transparent 
sea, whose floor of pebbles, bhells and weeds, 
is as a diamond- paved palace of romance, 
shone on and illustrated as it is by the sun's 
rays. He would see the flame arise from Ve- 
suvius, and behold afar off the smoke of the 
burning lava, — such was the emblem of his 
former life ; but he would then have become, 
like the land he trod, an extinguished volcano ; 
and the soil would prove more fertile, more 
rich in beauty and excellence, than those cold 
natures which had never felt the vivifying heat 
of mighty and subdued passions. 

Thus she dreamed j and tlius she cheated 
herself into tranquillity* She arrived at Pisa, 
where she was met by Orlando Quartezzani, 
who explained to her much of the minuti^ of 



Ch. X.] VALPERGA. 207 

the plot, and besought her to hasten its execu- 
tion. " I pine, in exile," he said, " still to be- 
hold that ungrateful tyrant seated on a throne, 
which, if it be not formed of our skulls, yet 
exists only to torture and destroy us. My bro- 
thers are tardy, those Avoggadii, lazy and inert. 
They are still at Lucca; they see its fertile 
vallies ; they live among its mountains. Some- 
times indeed I dare go to the top of the hill of 
San Giuliano, and behold its towers almost at 
my feet; but I long to make one with my 
fellow- citizens, to enter again into the lists of 
life." 

Euthanasia quitted Pisa. She crossed the 
plain to the foot of the hills, and passed along 
through Pugnano and Ripafrata. She was 
very melancholy. How could it be otherwise ? 
She had entered upon a race, whose penalty 
was death, whose prize was yet hidden in the 
mists of futurity ; — it might turn out even more 
bhghting and terrible than death itself. But 
there was no room for retreat ; the path was 
narrow, and her chariot could not turn ; she 
must fix her eyes upon the goal, for be the 
consequence good or evil, she must arrive 



208 VALPERGA. [Ch. X. 

there, she must there seek and find the fulfil- 
ment of her destiny. 

She entered Lucca at the beginning of the 
month of December; and she went imme- 
diately to the palace which had been assigned 
her by the Lucchese government, in compen- 
sation for her demolished castle. The same 
evening that she arrived, the two chiefs of the 
conspiracy, Ugo Quartezzani and Tripalda, 
visited her. The name of Tripalda, so often 
and so fearfully repeated by the dying Bea- 
trice, made her shrink from all communication 
with one who had tarnished his life with the 
foulest crimes. On this occasion she was 
obliged however to smother her indignation • 
and he, from a sense of his own importance^ 
was more presumptuous and insolent than 
she had ever seen him. 

** Madonna," said he, stalking forward with an 
erect mien, and half shut eyes, which, altliough 
they were not bent on the ground, yet ever 
avoided the direct gaze of those to whom he 
spoke; — " Madonna, I much praise your wis- 
dom in entering into this conspiracy. We all 
know that, when you choose to exert your abi- 



Ch. X.] VALPERGA. 209 

lities, you are the cleverest woman in Tuscany. 
This is a period which will shew you in your 
true colours/* 

" Mester Battista, let us leave to speak of 
me and my poor talents : we come to talk of 
far weightier matter ; and 1 bear a message 
to Messer Ugo from his brother Orlando." 

They now began to speak of the future ; but 
Tripalda would allow no one to talk but him- 
self; and he walked up and down the room 
delivering his opinion in a loud voice. 

" Hush,for Jesu's sake!" cried Ugo, " some 
one will overhear us, and we are all lost." 

Tripalda looked suspiciously around, ap- 
proached on tiptoe the sopha on which Eu- 
thanasia and Ugo sat, and, speaking in a whis- 
per, he said, — " I tell you we shall succeed. 
Look ! I have already sharpened the dagger 
which is to stab the tyrant to the heart." 

** Now the Mother of God defend him!" 
cried Euthanasia, turninp- pale : " that is be- ' 
yond my contract. Bear witness, Ugo, that I 
entered into this plot on condition that his life 
should be saved." 

" Women ! women ! " said Tripalda, con- 



210 VALPERGA. [Ch. X. 

temptuously. " By the body of Bacchus ! I 
wonder what Bondehiionti meant by intro- 
ducing a woman into the plot. One way or 
another they have spoiled, and ever will spoil, 
every design that the wisdom of man has con- 
trived. I say he must die,"' 

" I say he shall not, sir priest. And remem- 
ber, you are not one who dares place your *' 
warrant on the life of Antelminelli. That is 
guarded by spirits of whose very existence you 
are ignorant ; it is guarded by devoted love and 
disinterested virtue ; and you shall not endan- 
ger it." 

^^ You indeed talk of spirits, of which I and 
all the wise among men know nothing. In the 
present case I do not exactly see what devoted 
love has to do with a conspiracy to overthrow 
the party beloved ; and as for disinterested vir- 
tue, all the virtue I know any thing about bids 
me stab the tyrant. He shall die." 

" Nay, as you say that you understand me 
not, you may well leave to speak of what dwells 
without the circle of your intelhgence. Are you 
not a priest? a man of peace? and dare you 
avow such thoughts? They shame your pro- 



Ch. X.] VALPERGA. 211 

fession ; and, if any spark of virtue dwelt within 
you, you would now blush as deep a red, as 
your hands would shew, stained with that 
blood you think to shed." 

^* Madonna," said Ugo, " you are now ani- 
itiated beyond all prudence. Speak mildly ; 
and Messer Tripalda will yield." 

" That will I not ! " cried Tripalda, corn- 
pressing his thin lips, and elevating his high 
brows, " I have doomed him to death ; and 
he shall die. By my soul's salvation, he 
8hall!" 

" Then is your soul lost, for he shall live." 

The gentle modulation of Euthanasia's voice, 
now first attuned to command, carried with it 
an irresistible force, while she extended her 
fair arm in earnest gesture ; then, calming her- 
selt^ she continued : '^ I entered into this con- 
spiracy on one condition ; and I might well 
say, * If you keep not your words with me, 
neither will I keep mine with you ; if you be- 
tray me, so will I betray you.' But I say not 
this ; 1 have other means of silencing this man. 
I know you, Tripalda ; and you are well aware, 
that I can see through the many folds which 



212 VALPERGA. [Ch. X. 

jOM have wound round your heart. You 
oblige me to menace you. I can tell a tale, 
Tripalda, a tale the knowledge of whose ex- 
ceeding horror is confined to your own pol- 
luted heart ; but whose slightest sketch would 
fill mankind with detestation, and your destruc- 
tion would quickly follow. Dare not even to 
imagine the death of Castruccio ; while he is 
safe, you are safe ; otherwise you know what 
will follow." 

" So far from knowing, I cannot even guess 
your meaning," replied Tripalda ; but with a 
fubdued voice and a humble manner. '<-In 
truth, Madonna, you speak enigmas to me. 
But since you are resolved to save the life of 
the prince, so let it be. But I suppose you 
will allow us to secure his person." 

" We have a plan for that," said Euthana- 
sia, turning to Ugo, " a plan to which I hope 
you will accede : for Castruccio must be saved ; 
Bondelmonti entered into that engagemeni; 
with me, before I became a party to your 
plot." 

" It shall be as you command," replied Tp- 
palda, who had shifted his place several times, 



Ch. X.] VALPEnOA. ^\5 

and seemed to stand as uneasily before the 
now softened looks of Euthanasia, as a hypo- 
cnte well might before the eyes of the accusing 
angel. " I will leave you now/' continued he, 
"for I promised to be with JNicola dei Avo- 
gadii at eight o'clock, and seven struck some 
time ago. Good night. Madonna; when we 
again meet, I hope you will be better pleased 
with my intentions, and thank me for my ex- 
ertions in favour of your friend, the prince." 

He quitted the room. Euthanasia followed 
him with her eyes until he had closed the 
door; and then she said to Ugo, " I distrust 
that man ; and if my purpose did not Hft me 
alike above fear and hope, 1 should dread him. 
But do you have a care, Ugo; and, if you re- 
gard your own safety, watch him, as you would 
one whose sword you must parry, until the 
deed you meditate be accomplished." 

" You judge hastily. Madonna; he is the 
sworn enemy of Castruccio ; and l believe him 
to be, on this occasion at least, trust-worthy. 
1 cannot divine what you know concerning 
hinl ; it is surely something black, for he cow- 
ered beneath your words. But a man may bQ 



214 VALPERGA. [Cli. X.' 

one day wicked, and good the next ; for self- 
interest sways all, and we are virtuous or vi- 
cious as we hope for advantage to ourselves. 
The downfal of Antelminelli will raise him ; 
and therefore he is to be trusted." 

" That is bad philosophy, and w^orse mora- 
lity, Ugo : but we have no time to dispute now; 
remember, that I tell you to beware-of Tri- 
palda. Now let us occupy ourselves in w^or- 
thier considerations.'' 

After a long conversation, in which all was 
concluded except the exact period for the 
breaking out of the conspiracy, Ugo retired, to 
prepare messengers for Pisa and Florence, that 
they might, with the concurrence of their as- 
sociates, determine the conduct of this last act 
of the tragedy. Euthanasia was left alone. 
She had been roused to the expression of" 
anger by the insolent cruelty of Tripalda; but 
her nature, mild as it was, quickly forgot the 
feeling of indignation, and now other thoughts 
(oh, far other thoughts ! ) possessed her. She 
w^as again in Lucca. She ascended to the 
tower of her palace; and the waning moon, 
which shone in the east, shed its yellow and 



Cii. X.] VALPERGA. 215 

meiancholy light over the landscape : she 
could distinguish afar the abrupt and isolated 
rock on which the castle of Valperga had 
stood ; it formed one of the sides of the chasm 
which the spirits of creation had opened to 
make free the course of the Serchio. The scene 
was unchanged ; and even in winter the soul 
of beauty hovered over it, ready again to re- 
animate the corpse, when the caducean wand 
of spring should touch it. The narrow, deep 
streets of Lucca lay like the allies of a prison 
around her ; and she longed for the consum- 
mation of the deed in which she had engaged, 
when she might fly for ever from a scene, 
which had been too dear to her, not to make 
its sight painful in her altered situation. 

In the mean time, while in deep security of 
thought she brooded over the success of her 
attempt, the hour which yet lingered on the 
dial was big with her ruin ; and events which 
threatened to destroy her for ever, already 
came so near, that their awful shadow began 
to be thrown on the path of her life. 

Tripalda had left her, burning with all the 
mahce of which his evil nature was so amply 



216 VALPERGA. [Ch. X. 

susceptible. He had learned that the prisoner 
of the castle in the Campagna di Roma had 
survived, and had fallen into the hands of Eu- 
thanasia : and he knew that his fate depended 
upon disclosures that she was enabled to make. 
The prisoner was now dead ; but both Cas- 
truccio and Euthanasia had become in part 
the depositaries of her secret ; Euthanasia had 
heard his name pronounced, mingled with- 
shrieks and despair, by the lips of the lovely 
maniac ; and, after her death, she had reveal- 
ed her suspicions to the prince, while he in 
anger forbade the priest ever again to ap- 
proach his palace or his j^^erson. In disgra- 
cing and banisliing him from his presence, Cas- 
truccio had incurred the penalty of his hate ; 
and he was overjoyed to think, that in destroy- 
ing the man who had injured him, he should 
also free himself from one who was conscious 
of the most perilous secrets concerning him. 
He had been loud in his abuse of the prince ; 
but none had listened to him, except those 
who sympathized in his feelings ; and Antel- 
minelli despised him too heartily to take heed 
to what he said. 



Qi.X.] VALPERGA. 217 

Thus, with the wily heart and wicked de- 
sign of a serpent beneath a magpie's exterior, 
this self-named Brutus of modern Italy, whose 
feigned folly was a cover for pride, selfishness 
and all uncharitableness, f(^mented a conspi- 
racy in Lucca to overthrow a tyrant, who well 
deserved to fall, but who was as pure as the 
milk-rwhite dove, if compared with the sable 
plumage of this crow. He had endeavoured 
to intice Euthanasia to participate in the plot, 
he hardly knew why, secure that, if she were 
persuaded to enter into it, it would be pregnant 
with nothing but misery and suffering for her. 
The scene which bad taken place in her pa- 
lace, overturned all his ideas. Castruccio de- 
spised and banished him ; but he had never 
menaced the disclosure of those secrets, whose 
smallest effect would be to immure him for 
ever within tlie dungeons of some convent. 
He therefore hated, rather than feared him ; 
but the words of Euthanasia had terrified 
his soul, and with his terror awakened all 
those feelings of hellish malignity with whicli 
his heart was imbued. To destroy her, and 
save himself, was now the scope of his desire. 

YQU III. I- 



21S VALPERGA. [Ch. X. 

To betray the conspiracy, and deliver over his 
confederates to death, was of Uttle moment in 
his eyes, compared with the care he had for 
his own preservation, and the satisfaction of 
his new-born revenge. All night he slept not; 
he walked up and down his room, easing his 
heart with curses, and with images of impend- 
ing ruin for his enemies. When morning 
dawned, he hasted to Agosta, and made his 
way into the private cabinet of Vanni Mor- 
decastelli. 

Castruccio was at Pistoia, and would not 
return until the following day; in the mean 
time Mordecastelli was the governor of Lucca. 
He w^as seated in his cabinet with his secre- 
tary when Tripalda eritered : like a true cour- 
tier, he hardly deigned to look on the man who 
was disgraced by his prince. 

*' Messer Tripalda," said he, " are you still 
in Lucca ? I thought some one told me that 
you had returned to your canonicate. Have 
you any business with me ? Be brief; for you 
see that I am occupied." 

^^ Messer Vanni, I have business with you; 
but it must be private. Do not look thus con- 



Gh. X.] VALPERGAii 2\^ 

temptuously on me ; for you know that I have 
been useful to you before ; and I shall now be 
so again/' 

*' 1 do not much care to trust myself alone 
with you ; for they say that you have sworn 
destruction to all the prince's friends. How- 
ever, I am armed/' he continued, taking a 
dagger from his bosom, and drawing it from 
it's sheath ; " so, Ubaldo, you may leave us 
alone." 

''And, Ubaldo, do you hear," cried Tri- 
palda, " it is as much as your life is worth to 
tell any one that I am with the governor. The 
very walls of the palace must not know it." 

" And are you the lord to threaten me, 
Messer Canonico ? though you have a fooFs 
head, pray keep a discreet tongue," 

" Silence, Ubaldo," said Mordecastelli. 
"Go, and remember what he says : you shall 
answer for it, if it be known that this visit has 

taken place. And now. Sir Priest, what 

have you to say to me r if it be not something 
well worth the hearing, you shall pay a rich pe- 
nalty for this impertinence of yours.'- 

" Remember, Messer Vanni, who put you 
L 2 



220 VALPERGA. [Ch. X. 

on the right scent in Leodino's plot ; remem- 
ber the golden harvest which that brought you 
in. Remember this ; and put aside your pride 
and insolence." 

" I remember well the detestable part that 
you then played, and it had been well that your 
head had been struck off instead of Leodino's. 
But you trifle now, and I have no time to 
waste ; if you have any fresh scene of villainy 
to disclose, be quick." 

" I have discovered a plot of the highest 
consequence. One that counts among the 
conspirators the first citizens of the principa- 
lity. But I must make my conditions before 
I tell you further :. I hold the life of your lord 
in my grasp ; and, before I part with my ad- 
vantage, I must be paid its full worth." 

"Conditions! Aye, they shall be generous 
and ample ones ; if you fairly tell all, you shall 
be beheved on your word, and not be put to 
the torture, to extort that which craft may make 
you conceal : these are all the conditions a 
villain, such as you, deserves. Come, waste 
no more time ; if your plot be worth the tell- 
ing, you well know that you will not go unre- 



Ch. X.] VALPERGA. 221 

warded ; if this is all smoke, why perchance 
you may be smothered in it ; so no more de- 
lay." 

Tripalda opened each door, peeped behind 
the hangings, under the tables, and chairs; 
and then, approaching as softly as a cat who 
sees a mouse playing in the moonshine, or a 
spider who beholds his prey unconsciously 
cleaning his wings within an inch of him, he 
sat down beside Mordecastelli and whispered : 

"The Avogadii.^ 

" Well, what of them ? I know that they 
hate Antelminellij but they are not powerful 
enough to do any mischief." 

"The Quartezzani/V 

" Nay, then this is of deeper interest. Have 
they turned vipers ? By St. M artin ! they have 
a sting!'* 

Tripalda in a low and solemn voice entered 
into a detail of the plot, " And now," said 
he, when he had nearly concluded, "except 
for one circumstance, you had not heard a 
word of this from me." 

" You are a villain to say so ; — but what is 



£2^2 VALPERGA. [Ch^X. 

this circumstance? the love you bear your 
prince i ** 

" The love I bear him might have made me 
bring the Pope to Lucca with thirty thousand 
Gascons at his heels, but not betray a plot 
against him. No truly it was not that ; but 
they have admitted a woman into it ; and, as 
there is neither safety nor success where they 
are, I made my retreat in good time." 

" A woman ! What, Berta Avogadii ? " 

"One of far higher rank; the countess of 
Valperga." 

" Nay, then, it is all a lie, Tripalda, and, by 
the Virgin, you shall repent having amused mp 
with your inventions ! The countess of Val- 
perga ! She is too wise and too holy to mingle 
in one of your midnight plots : besides, once 
upon a time, to my knowledge she loved Cas- 
truccio." 

" The old proverb tells us, Vanni, that 
sweetest love turns to bitterest hate. Remem- 
ber Valperga ! Do you think she has forgotten 
it? Remember her castle, her power, the state 
she used to keep, when she was queen of those 



Ch. X.] VALPERGA. 12^3 

barren mountains ! Do you think she has for- 
gotten that? She might carry it humbly ; but 
she, Uke the rest of those painted ruins, is 
proud at heart, proud and revengeful ; why she 
has vowed the death of her quondam lover," 

" I would not believe it, if an angel were to 
tell me ; do you think then that I V\7ill credit 
such a tale, when it is given out by a devil like 
you ? Nay, do not frown. Sir Priest ; the de- 
vil loves to clothe himself in a holy garb ; and 
report says that you have more than once 
shewn the cloven foot" 

'^ You are pleased to jest. Lord Governor," 
replied Tripalda, with a ghastly smile, " do 
you know the hand-writing of Orlando Quar- 
tezzani ? '* 

" As I know my own." 

" Read then that letter." 

It was a letter from Orlando to Tripalda, 
conjuring him to be speedy in his operations, 
and saying that, since the countess of Valper- 
ga appeared to enter into the plot with a w 11- 
ing heart, all difficulties would now be easily 
removed. 

Vanni put down the letter with a look of 



224 VALPERGA. [Ch. X. 

iningled contempt and indignation. "And 
"who else have ye among you ? I expect next 
to hear that some of the saints or martyrs, or 
perhaps the Virgin herself has con>e down to 
aid you/' 

" Here is a list of the conspirators ; and here 
are letters which will serve as further proofs of 
the truth of my disclosures/* 

" Give them to me. And now let me tell 
you, my excellent fox, that I by no means trust 
you, and that, knowing your tricks of old, I 
may well suspect that, after trying to get all 
you can from us by betraying your associates, 
you will endeavour to get all you can out of 
them by assisting them to escape; so, my 
good fellow, you must for the present remain 
under lock and key/' 

" I hoped that I had deserved better " 

" Deserved ! Aye, you deserve the torture, 
as much as the vilest heretic who denies the 
passion of our Redeemer. You know your- 
self to be an arch-traitor, and, by the saints 1 
you shall be treated hke one. Come, there is 
a better room for your prison than you deserve : 
go in peaceably ; for if you oblige me to use 



Ch. X.] VALPERGA. 2«5 

force, you shall lodge for the next week in one 
of those holes under ground, of which 1 believe 
you have some knowledge, since your fiendish 
malice contrived them." 

« Well, Vanni, I yield. But I hope that 
your future gratitude " 

" Oh ! trust to my gratitude. I know my 
trade too well not to encourage such hell-hounds 
as you are." 



h5 



2^6 VALPERGA. [Ch. XI, 



CHAPTER XI. 

Euthanasia in Prison. 

Having thus disposed of Tripalda, Vanni 
sat down to study the hst of conspirators that 
he had given him. It contained three hun- 
dred names. " What a murderous dog this 
priest is!" he cried. " Why every noble fa- 
mily has one or more of its members engaged 
m this plot, I shall take the liberty to curtail 
it exceedingly, before it meets the eyes of the 
prince. The ringleaders are enough for him : 
the rest I shall punish on my private account; 
a few fines will bring them to reason, and they 
are better subjects ever after. But Valperga ! 
I would as soon have believed that an ass could 
drink up the moon, as that that villain could have 
drawn her from her illustrious sphere, to be 
swallowed up among the rest of the gulls, when 
he wants to make merry with a few murders. 



Ch. XT.] tALPERGAi ^07 

But, by St. Martin ! as she has sown, so must 
she reap ; and I hate her ten times the more 
for her hypocritical, angel face. Conspire 
against Castruccio 1 He used her ill ; but a 
meek and forbearing woman's love that for- 
gave all injuries, is what she ever boasted, if 
not in words, at least in looks and manners. 
For thy sake, thou goodly painted saint, like 
the rest of them, well looking outside, but 
worms arid corruption within, I will never 
trust more to any of thy sex ! — Nor shalt thou 
escape. Others will pay a fearful penalty for 
their treason ; and thine, which merits much 
more than theirs, shall not go free. I could 
have staked my life upon Euthanasia ; I knew 
her from a child ; I remember her a smiling 
cherub with deep blue eyes and curly tresses ; 
and her very name seemed to carry a divinity 
with it. I have many sins on my head ; and, 
when my death comes, many years of purga- 
tory may be tacked on to my absolution ; but 
methought that, when I contemplated and al- 
most adored the virtues of Euthanasia, my 
soul was half-way through its purification ; — 
and she to fall ! '' 



228 VALPERGA. [Ch. XT. 

Vanni, who, in the common acceptation, 
was truly faithful to his master, was struck 
with disgust at what appeared to him the depth 
of treachery on her part. He knew httle of 
the human heart, its wondrous subtlety and 
iawyer-like distinctions ; he could not imagine 
the thousand sophistries that cloaked her pur- 
pose to Euthanasia, the veils of woven wind, 
that made her apparent treachery shew like 
purest truth to her. He could not judge of 
the enthusiasm, that, although it permitted her 
to foresee the opprobrium and condemnation 
which would be attached to her conduct, yet 
made her trample upon all. She walked on 
in what she deemed the right path; and neither 
the pangs of doubt, nor the imminent risque 
that awaited her perseverance, could arrest 
her ; or, worse than all, the harsh opinion of 
man, his ever ready censure of ideas he can- 
not understand, his fiery scorn of virtue which 
he might never attain. She passed on to her 
goal, fearless of, and despising "the barbed 
tongues, or thoughts more sharp than they," 
which threatened to wound her most sacred 
feelings. 



Ch. XI.] VALPERGA. ^^ 

But Vanni could not penetrate the inner 
sanctuary of her heart, which throned self- 
approbation as its deity, and cared not for the 
false gods that usurp the pleasant groves and 
high places of the world. After having vented 
his spleen with that sceptred infallibiUty men 
assume, and condemned her and her whole 
sex unheard, Mordecastelli proceeded to more 
active business, and before night the chiefs of 
the conspiracy were thrown into prison. 

Early the following morning Castruccio 
returned to Lucca, Mordecastelli met him 
with a countenance, in which the falcon-eye 
of the prince could read uncommon tidings. 
" Why do you look thus, my friend?" said he* 
" Either laugh or cry ; or tell me why you do 
neither, although on the verge of both." 

" My lord, I have cause. 1 have discovered 
a conspiracy which threatened your power, 
and that not a mean one ; so that I must wish 
you joy, that you have again escaped from these 
harpies. But, when you hear the names of 
tiie conspirators, you also will be sorrowful ; 
several of your friends are among them ; and 
names, which have been repeated in your daily 



fi% VALPERGA. [Ch. XI, 

prayers with blessings joined to them, are now 
written in the Ust of traitors." 

" When I took power upon me, my dear 
Vanni, I well knew that I wrapt suspicion 
about me as a robe, and wedded danger, and 
treachery, and most other evils. So let it be! 
I was yet a boy, when I prayed to be a prince, 
though my crown were of thorns. But who are 
these ? Which of my old friends are so blind, 
as to see their own interest in my downfal?" 

Mordecastelli gave the list of the ringleaders 
which he had prepared, and watched the 
countenance of Castruccio as he read it. He 
observed contempt and carelessness on his 
countenance, until the name of the countess 
of Valperga met his eyes; he then saw the 
expression change, and a slight convulsion on 
his lips, which he evidently strove to suppress. 
Vanni could contain himself no longer. 

^* You see, my lord, you see her name. 
And, as true as there is a sun in heaven, as 
true, as she is false, this saintlike Euthanasia 
has spotted her soul with treason. I have 
proofs, here they are. It would make one 
doubt one's salvation, to see her with her Ma- 



Ch. XI.] VALPERGiX. 9S51 

<]ona face creep into this nest of traitors. 
There they must have been, closeted in a cei* 
lar, or hid in some dark hole ; for else my spies 
would have earthed them out long ago. And 
I figure her to myself, with her golden hair, 
and eyes which illumined even the night, they 
were so dazzling, — entering a room made dark 
enough to hide treason ; — and to think that the 
hellish bat did not take wing out at the window 
when she appeared ! but no, she cherished him 
in her bosom." 

*^ You are eloquent, Vanni." 

*' I am, my lord. 1 took her for an angel, 
and I find her a woman ;— one of those frail, 
foolish creatures we all despise ** 

" Peace, peace, my dear Vanni ; you talk 
insufferable nonsense. Let us proceed to more 
serious business. What have you done with 
these people ?'* 

'< They are all in prison." 

" The countess among them r " 

" Why, my lord, would you have had her 
spared ? " 

" She is in prison then I " 

<^ She is." 



232 VALPERGA. [Ch. XI. 

*^ Vanni, you must look to these people. I 
assure you that I by no means find myself 
mercifully inclined towards them. These con- 
tinual plots, and this foolish ingratitude, to 
give it no worse name, disturb our government 
too much. I will tear it away root and branch ; 
and the punishment of these fellows shall be a 
terrible warning to those who may think of 
treading in the same steps." 

Castruccio fixed liis eyes upon Morde- 
castelli ; but there w^as an expression in them 
that made the confident cast hi^ upon the 
ground. They glared ; and his pale face became 
paler, so that his very lips were white. He 
looked steadily on Mordecastelli for some 
minutes ; and then said i 

« They must all die." 

'^They shall, my lord." 

<' Yet not by an easy death. That were a 
poor revenge. They shall die, as they have 
lived, like traitors ; and on their living tombs 
shall be written. Thus Castruccio punishes his 
rebel subjects. Have I toiled, exposed my 
person to danger, become the fear and ht)pe 
of Tuscany, to stain with my best blood the 



Ch. XI.] VALPERGA. QSS 

dagger of one of these miserable \illains ? Do 
you see that they die so, Vanni, as that I may 
be satisfied/* 

" I will, my lord. And the countess ?"— 

" Leave her to me, I will be her judge and 
executioner/' 

"Castruccio?" 

" Do not look so pale, Vanni ; you do not 
understand. A few hours hence 1 will tell you 
more. Now leave me.*' 

Solitude is a coy companion for a prince, 
and one he little loves. But Castruccio had 
much to occupy his thoughts, much that ago- 
i:iized him. "Revenge!'* He clenched his 
hand, and, throwing his eyes upward, he cried : 
*' Yes, revenge is among those few goods in 
life, which compensate for its many evils. Yet 
it is poor : it is a passion which can have no 
end. Burning in pursuit, cold and unsatis- 
factory in its conclusion, it is as love, whicji 
wears out its soul in unrequited caresses. But 
still, it shall be mine ; and these shall suffer. 
They shall feel in every nerve what it is to 
have awakened me. I will not fear ; I will 
not feel my hfe depend alone upon the word 



234 VALPERGA. [Ch. XI. 

of these most impotent slaves. They shall die ; 
and the whole world shall learn that Castruccio 
can revenge." 

Thus he thought: yet there was an inner 
sense, that betrayed to him the paltriness of 
his feelings, when he imagined that there was 
glory in trampling upon the enemy beneath 
his feet. He would not hsten to this small 
still voice ; but, turning from these ideas, he 
began to reflect on that which filled him with 
a bitterness of feeling to which he had long 
been a stranger. 

" So, she has conspired against me ; and, 
forgetful of all those ties that bound us not- 
withstanding her coldness, she has plotted my 
death! She knew, she must have known, that 
in spite of absence and repulse, she was the 
saint of my Ufe ; and that this one human w^eak- 
ness, or human virtue, remained to me, when 
power and a strong will had in other respects 
metamorphosed me. Does she forget, that I 
have ever worn near my heart a medalhon 
engraven with her vows of childhood ? She 
has forgotten all. And not only has she for- 
gotten to love, but she has cast aside the up- 



Ch. XI.] VALPERGA. ^35 

rightness of lier understanding, and stained 
the purity of her soul. 

" It is well for me to speak thus, who, instead 
of the virtues that once were mine, have as mi- 
nisters, revenge, and hate, and conquest. But, 
although I choose to be thus, and although I 
have selected these hell-hounds to drag my car 
of life, 1 have not lost the sense of what is just 
and right ; and, in the midst of all my wilful 
errors and my degradation, I could discern 
-find worship the pure loveliness of Euthanasia. 
By the saints! I believed, that, if she died, 
iike Dante^s Beatrice, she would plead for me 
before the throne of the Eternal, and that I 
should be saved through her. Now she is 
lost, and may perdition seize the whole worth- 
less race of man, since it has fallen upon her ! 

" But SHE MUST BE SAVED. JMy hands 
shall not be stained with her blood, nor my 
fioul bear the brand of that crime. But she 
must not stay here ; nor shall she remain in Tus- 
cany. She shall go far away, so that I never 
more may hear her name : that shall be her 
puuishment, and she must bear it. Now I 



^36 VALPEllGA. [Ch, XI. 

must contrive the means ; for she shall not re« 
main another night in prison." 

Euthanasia in prison! Yes; she had be- 
come the inhabitant of this abode of crime, 
though her high mind was as far above fault 
£is human nature could soar ; hers, if it w^ere 
an error, was one of judgement. But why 
should I call it error ? To remove a cruel ty- 
rant from his seat of power, — to devote those 
days, which she might have spent in luxury 
and pleasure, to a deep solitude, w^here neither 
love nor sympathy would cheer her ; — to bear 
his anger, perhaps his hate, and in the midst 
of all to preserve a firmness and sweetness, 
that might sustain her, and soften him, — to 
quit all her friends, and her native country for 
ever, to follow in the steps of one she had 
ceased to love, but to whom she felt herself 
for ever bound by her wish to preserve him 
from that misery which his crimes would ulti- 
mately occasion him : these were her errors.. 

After Quartezzani had quitted her on the 
night of her arrival in Lucca, she had not 
slept ; she was too full of various thought, of 



Cli. xr.] VALPERGA* 2375 

dread and breathless expectation, to compose 
her spirits to rest. She felt eternity in each 
second ; and each slow hour seemed to creep 
forward, stretching itself in a wide, endless cir- 
cle around her. When day dawned, it found 
her, not sleeping, but with open eyes looking 
on the one last star that faded in the west, call- 
ing to mind a thousand associations, a thou- 
sand hopes, now lying dead in the ashes of 
that pyre time had heaped together and con- 
sumed; she looked forward; yet then she 
paused; she dared not attempt to penetrate 
into futurity; — all was so tempestuous and 
dark. 

She arose at sun-rise, and had descended 
into the garden, to breathe the bleak, but, to 
her feverish spirits the refreshing air of a De- 
cember morning ; when, at noon, Quartezzani 
rushed in ; he was deadly pale, and his hair 
seemed to stand on end with fear. 

" Holy saints ! what has happened ? " cried 
Euthanasia. 

" We are all lost ! dead, or worse than dead ! 
We are betrayed!" 

" Tripalda has betrayed us? " 



238 VALPERGA. [Ch. XI. 

« He has." 

" And there is no escape ? " 

^^ None. The gates are shut, nor will they 
be opened, until we are all seized." 

" Then most certainly we die ? " 

^' As sure as that Christ died upon the cross ! 
so surely shall we perish." 

" Then courage, my friend, and let us cast 
aside, with all mortal hopes, all mortal fear. 
I have the start of you, Ugo ; I was prepared 
for this ; but you would not believe me, until 
now my predictions are sealed by the event. 
Let us die, as we would have lived, for the 
cause of freedom ; and let no trembling dismay, 
no coward fear, make us the mock of our ene- 
mies. 

" Other men in various ages have died by 
untimely death, and we will dare to imitate 
them. Others have sustained their fate w^ith 
fortitude ; and let faith and submission to the 
will of heaven be to us, instead of that daunt- 
less spirit of inbred virtue that supported the 
heroes of antiquity." 

Euthanasia raised her own spirits as she 
spoke ; and fearless expectation, and something 



Ch. XI.] VALPERGA. 2S9 

like triumph, illuminated her countenance, as 
she cast her eyes upward, and with her hand 
clasped that of her friend. He received no 
warmth from the pressure; chilly fear pos- 
sessed him ; and he stood utterly dejected be- 
fore her — he wept, 

" Aye, weep," she continued, " and I also, 
did not the tempest of my soul bear all clouds 
far away, 1 also might shed tears. You weep 

to leave those whom you love, that is a 

bitter pang. You weep to see your associates 
suffer ; but each must relieve the other from 
that sorrow^ by cheerfulness and courage. But," 
she continued, seeing him entirely subdued by 
fear, " is there no hope of escape ? Exert your 
ingenuity; once past the gates, you would 
soon be out of the territory of Lucca, And 

Castruccio " 

" Oh, that most hated name ! Bloody, execra- 
ble tyrant ! Curse him ! May the fiends—' 
" Cease ! know you not that a dying man's 
curse falls more on himself, than on him against 
whom he imprecates the WTath of heaven ? 
This is childish; Ugo, collect yourself; you 
have a wife ;— woman's wit is ready ; consult 



240 VALPERGA. [Ch. XT. 

with her ; she may devise some plan for your 
safety/' 

^* You are an angel of consolation, Eutha- 
sia. Heaven bless you ! and do you also re- 
flect on your own danger." 

He left her: and she (without giving a 
thought to vain regret ; her moments were too 
precious) sat down and wrote a long letter to 
Bondelmonti. It was calm and affectionate : 
she felt raised above mortality ; and her words 
expressed the exceeding serenity of her soul. 
She gave a last farewel to her friends. " It 
may seem strange to you," she wrote, " tliat 
I express myself thus : and indeed, when I 
reason with myself, methinks I ought not to 
expect death from the hands of Antelminelli. 
Nor do I ; and yet I expect some solemn ter- 
mination to this scene, some catastrophe which 
will divide me from you for ever. Nor is it 
Italy, beloved and native Italy, that I shall 
leave, but also this air, this sun, and the earth's 
beauty. I feel thus ; and therefore do I write 
you an eternal farewel." 

She had scarcely finished her letter, when 
a messenger arrived from Mordecastelli. He 



Ch. XI.] VALPERGA. S41 

told her that the conspiracy was divulged, and 
that she must in a prison await the orders of 
Castruccio. She started at the word Prison; 
but, recovering herself, she made a sign that 
she was ready to follow the messenger ; so, 
without a word, without a sigh, she quitted 
her palace, and, ascending her litter, was 
conducted to her place of confinement. She 
passed through the same streets, through which 
the jailor had conducted her to the dungeon of 
Beatrice. A small and curiously carved shrine 
of the Madona with a lamp before it, chanced 
to recal this circumstance to her mind. " Thou 
art at peace, blessed one," she said, " there 
where 1 hope soon to be."*' 

Thejailor of the prison, who was the same 
that had besought her to come and comfort 
poor Beatrice, received her with a sorrowful 
countenance, and led her to his most decent 
apartment, high in the tower, that overlooked the 
rest of the building. There she was left alone 
to ruminate on her fortunes, and to imbue her- 
self with that fortitude, which might carry her 
with, honour through the trials that awaited 
her. The circumstance that pressed most pain- 

VOL. HI. M 



242 VALPEKGA. [Ch. XI. 

fully upon lier, was the death which her asso- 
ciates must suffer. She tried to forget herself; 
she did not fear death ; she did not expect it 
at the hands of Castruccio ; and her expecta- 
tions and ideas were too vague to permit her 
to dread much the coming events as they re- 
garded her. The window of her prison-cham- 
ber was not grated, and from it she could sur- 
vey the neighbouring country. A thousand 
feelings passed through her mind, and she 
could put no order in her thoughts. Sleep 
refused to visit her; but her reflections became 
peaceful, and full of pleasant images and recol- 
lections. 

Morning succeeded to a winter's night. It 
was clear, and sunshiny, but cold. The 
cheering beams poured into her room ; she 
looked upon the azure sky, and the flock of 
giant mountains which lay crouching around, 
with a strange pleasure. She felt as if she 
saw them for the last time, but as if she 
were capable of enjoying until the latest mo- 
ment those pleasures which nature had ever 
conferred upon her. She repeated some of 
Dante's verses where he describes in such di- 



Ch. XI.] VALPERGA. 243 

vine strains the solemn calm and celestial 
beauty of paradise. " When will it be my 
lot to wander there also," she said, " when 
shall I enjoy the windless air, and flower- 
starred meadows of that land ? " 

Thus the whole day passed; but it was 
quickly dark ; and she, who had watched for 
two nights, and was now quite overcome, 
looking out once upon the evening star, that 
star she had ever loved, and which was ever 
to her as the good genius of the world watch- 
ing his children in their repose, repeated the 
Catholic ejaculation, " Stella^ alma, benigtia, 
ora pro nobis ! " then, crossing herself, she lay 
down to rest, and quickly slept, as peacefully 
and happily, as a babe rocked in its mother's 
arms. 



M^ 



244 VALPERGA. [Ch. XII. 

CHAPTER XII. 

Euthanasia sails for Sicily, and is lost, 

A LITTLE before midnight Euthanasia's pri- 
son-chamber was unlocked, and the jailor en- 
tered, with a lamp in his hand, accompanied 
by one of majestic figure, and a countenance 
beautiful, but sad, and tarnished by the ex- 
pression of pride that animated it. " She 
sleeps," whispered the jailor. His companion 
raised his finger in token of silence ; and, taking 
the lamp from the man's hand, approached her 
mattress which was spread upon the floor, and, 
kneehng down beside it, earnestly gazed upon 
that face he had known so well in happier 
days. She made an uneasy motion, as if the 
lamp which he held disturbed her; he placed 
it on the ground, and shaded it with his figure ; 
while, by the soft light that fell upon her, he 
tried to read the images that were working in 
her mind. 



Ch. XII.] VALPERGA. S42^ 

She appeared but slightly altered since he 
had first seen her. If thought had drawn some 
lines in her brow, the intellect which its beau- 
tiful form expressed, effaced them to the eye 
of the spectator : her golden hair fell over her 
face and neck : he gently drew it back, while 
she smiled in her sleep ; her smile was ever past 
description lovely, and one might well exclaim 
with Dante 

Quel, ch' ellapar quando unpoco sojrUe, 
Non si puo dicer, ne tenere a mente ; 
Si e nuovo miracolo, e gentile *. 

He gazed on her long ; her white arm lay on 
her black dress, and he imprinted a sad kiss 
upon it; she awoke, and saw Castruccio gazing 
upon her. 

She started up ; " What does this mean ? '' 
she cried. 

His countenance, which had softened as lie 
looked upon her, now reassumed its severe ex- 
pression. " Madonna," he replied, " I come 
to take you from this place." 

* Vita Nuova di Dante, 



246 VALPERGA. [Ch. XII, 

She looked on him, endeavouring to read 
his purpose in his eyes ; but she saw there no 
explanation of her doubts : — " And whither do 
you intend to lead me ? " 

'* That you will know hereafter." 

She paused ; and he added with a disdain- 
ful smile, " The countess of Valperga need not 
fear, while I have the power to protect her, the 
fate she prepared for me." 

"What fate f" 

" Death." 

He spoke in an under tone, but with one of 
those modulations of voice, which, bringing to 
her mind scenes of other days, was best fitted 
to make an impression upon her. She replied 
almost unconsciously — " I did not prepare 
death for you ; God is my witness ! " 

" Well, Madonna, we will not quarrel about 
words ; or, like lawyers, clothe our purposes 
in such a subtle guise, that it might deceive all, 
if truth did not destroy the spider's web. I 
come to lead you from prison." 

" Not thus, my lord, not thus will 1 be 
saved. I disdain any longer to assert my in- 



Ch. XII,] VALPERGA. 247 

tentions, since I am not believed. But am I 
to be liberated alone ; or are my friends in- 
cluded in your merciful intentions ? " 

" Your friends are too dangerous enemies 
of the commonwealth, to be rescued from the 
fate that awaits them. Your sex, perhaps the 
memory of our ancient friendship, plead for 
you ; and I do not think that it accords with 
your wisdom to make conditions with one 
who has the power to do that which best 
pleases him." 

" And yet I will not yield ; 1 will not most 
unworthily attend to my own safety, while my 
associates die. No, my lord, if they are to be 
sacrificed, the addition of one poor woman 
will add little to the number of your victims ; 
and I cannot consent to desert them.'' 

" How do you desert them ? You will 
never see or hear of them more, or they of you. 
But this is trifling j and my moments are pre- 
cious.'* 

" I will not — I dare not follow you. My 
heart, my conscience tell me to remain. I 
must not disobey their voice." 

'^ Is your conscience so officious now, and 



248 VALPERGA. [Ch. XII. 

did it say nothing, or did your heart silence it, 
when you plotted my destruction ? " 

" Castruccio, this I believe is the last Ume 
that I shall ever speak to you. Our hearts are 
in the hands of the father of all; and he sees 
my thoughts. You know me too well, to be- 
lieve that I plotted your death, or that of any 
human creature. ]Now is not the time to 
explain my motives and plans : but my earnest 
prayer was that you might live ; my l^est hope, 
to make that life less miserable, less unworthy^ 
than it had hitherto been." 

She spoke with deep earnestness ; and there 
was something in her manner, as if the spirit 
of truth animated all her accents, that com- 
pelled assent. Castruccio believed all ; and 
he spoke in a milder and more persuasive man- 
ner " Poor Euthanasia ! so you were at last 
cajoled by that arch-traitor, Bondelmonti. 
Well, I believ^, and pardon all ; but, as the 
seal of the purity of your intentions, I now 
claim your consent to my offers of safety."^ 

" I cannot, indeed I cannot, consent. Be 
iperciful ; be magnanimous ; and pardon all, 
banish us all where our discontent cannot be 



Ch. XII.] VALPERGA. 249 

dangerous to you. But to desert my friends, 
and basely to save that life you deny to them, 
I never can." 

The jailor, who had hitherto stood in the shade 
near the door, could no longer contain himself. 
He knelt to Euthanasia, and earnestly and 
warmly intreated her to save herself, and not 
with wilful presumption to cast aside those 
means which God had brought about for her 
safety. " Remember," he cried, " your mis- 
fortunes will be on the prince's head ; make 
him not answer for you also. Oh ! lady, for 
his sake, for all our sakes, yield." 

Castruccio was much moved to see the 
warmth of this man. He took the hand of 
Euthanasia, he also knelt : " Yes, my only 
and dearest friend, save yourself for my sake. 
Yield, beloved Euthanasia, to my intreaties. 
Indeed you will not die ; for you well know 
that your life is dearer to me than my own. 
But yield to my request, by our former loves, 
I in treat ; by the prayers which you offer up 
for my salvation, I conjure you as they shall 
be heard, so also hear me ! " 

The hght of the solitary lamp fell full upon 
M 5 



250 VALPERGA. [Ch. XII. 

the countenance of Castruccio : it was soften- 
ed from all severity ; his eyes gUstened, and a 
tear stole silently down his cheek as he prayed 
her to yield. They talk of the tears of wo- 
men; but, when they flow most plenteously, 
they soften not the heart of man, as one tear 
from his eyes has power on a woman. Words 
and looks have been feigned ; they say, though 
I believe them not, that women have feigned 
tears ; but those of a man, which are ever as 
the last demonstration of a too full heart, force 
behef, and communicate to her who causes 
them, that excess of tenderness, that intense 
depth of passion, of which they are themselves 
the sure indication. 

Euthanasia had seen Castruccio weep but 
once before ; it was many years ago, when 
he departed for the battle of Monte Catini ; 
and he then sympathized too deeply in her sor- 
rows, not to repay her much weeping with 
one most true and sacred tear. And now this 
scene was present before her ; the gap of years 
remained unfilled ; and she had consented to 
his request, before she again recalled her 
thoughts, and saiv the dreary prison-chamber, 



Ch. XII.] VALPEUGA. 2j\ 

the glimmering lamp, and the rough form of 
the jailor who knelt beside Antelmineili. Her 
consent was scarcely obtained, when Castruc- 
cio leapt up, and, bidding her wrap her capu- 
chin about her, led her by the hand down the 
steep prison-stairs, while the jailor went before 
them, and unlocked, and drew back the bolts 
of, the heavy, creaking doors. 

At the entrance of the prison they found a 
man on horseback holding two other horses. 
It was Mordecastelli. Castruccio assisted Eu- 
thanasia to mount, and then sprang on his own 
saddle ; they walked their horses to a gate of 
the town which was open ;— they proceeded in 
silence; — at the gate Castruccio said to his 
companion — " Here leave us ; I shall speedily 
return.'* 

Vanni then turned bis horse's head, slightly 
answering the salute of Euthanasia, which she 
had involuntarily made at parting for ever with 
one who had been her intimate acquaintance. 
A countryman was w^aiting on horseback out- 
side the gate : " You are our guide ? " said 
Castruccio. '' Lead on then." 

It was a frosty^ cloudless night ; there was 



252 VALPERGA. [Ch. XII. 

no moon, but the stars shone intensely above ; 
the bright assemblage seemed to congregate 
from the far wastes of heaven, and to press in 
innumerable clusters upon the edge of the vi- 
sible atmosphere, to gaze upon the strange 
earth beneath. The party passed out of the 
city of Lucca by the Pisan gate, and at first put 
their horses to a gallop. As they approached 
the hills, Castruccio came up beside Euthana- 
sia ; they slackened their speed ; she spoke thus : 
" I have acceded to your request, and left 
the prison ; indeed it were useless in me to re- 
sist one who possesses the absolute pO\ver that 
you do. But 1 intreat you now that I see you 
for the last time, to have pity on my compa- 
nions in this conspiracy. I can think only of 
them ; and if I am to live — if ever I am again 
to hear of the events which will pass within 
the walls of that town, reflect on the sharp 
pang you will inflict upon me, if I hear of their 
destruction." 

" Madonna," replied the prince, " 1 will do 
that which I consider my duty : and let not 
these our last moments be employed in fruitless 
liscussion." 



Ch. XII.] VALPERGA. 253 

Euthanasia felt that it was in vain to speak. 
Her confederates, her friends, who were re- 
served instantly to die, stood in funereal 
groupe before the eye of her soul; her ima- 
gination made present to her all that they 
thought, and all that they were to suffer. She 
looked upon Castruccio ; she saw that he was 
moulded of an impenetrable substance ; her 
heart swelled to the confines of her bosom, and 
forbade her such degradation to the assured 
victims, as would be implied in her uttering 
one further word in their behalf to the unhear- 
ing, unrelenting being that stood before her. 
Castruccio continued : 

" You are about to leave Tuscany, and to 
take up your abode in a foreign land. You 
are still young. I send you from your native 
country ; but you may at a future period con- 
fess that I have done you a kindness. You 
have hitherto mingled in the embroiled politics 
of a repubhc, and seen conspiracies, heart- 
burnings, and war." 

Euthanasia felt herself unable to reply. 

They had crossed the plain of Lucca, and 
were arrived beneath those hills, which, crown- 



€54 VALPERGA. [Ch. XII. 

ed with towers, and clothed with deep forests, 
were the beautiful romantic steeps that she 
best loved. They struck off here from the 
usual road, and, fording the Serchio, began to 
ascend the acclivities on the opposite side, pro- 
ceeding one by one up the narrow path. At 
length they reached the summit, and viewed, 
stretched before them beneath the stars of 
night, a scene of enchanting beauty. The 
plain they had just crossed was dimly seen be- 
neath, bounded by its hills ; before them was 
another plain, desert and barren, through which 
the Serchio flows, bounded by the dark line of 
the sea ; and the Lago di Macciucoli, a marshy 
lake, was close beneath. 

'*' Here I leave you," said Castruccio : " there 
is your destination," and he pointed to the sea ; 
^' remember one with whom you have passed 
your happiest days." 

He took her hand, and kissed it. Her feel- 
ings were strange, and hardly to be described. 
She could not entu^ely forget what he had once 
been to her. She could at that moment have 
overlooked his tyranny, his lawless ambition, 
and his cruelty. But, no ; the moment itself 



Ch. XII.] VALPEROA. 255 

was a bane to oblivion. She could have for- 
gotten his past cruelties, but not those which 
were immediately to be perpetrated, to be per- 
petrated on individuals who had been united 
with her in a plot for liberty, and some of 
whom her name and her countenance had per- 
haps prompted to the desperate undertaking, 
and egged on to destruction. 

Castruccio spoke to the guide, recommend- 
ing haste as soon as they should reach the plain, 
and then turned his horse's head. Euthanasia 
and her conductor paused on the summit of 
the hill ; and she heard the steps of Castruccio's 
horse, as it made its way back through the 
tangled underwood. Then she also began her 
descent on the other side. 

Euthanasia, being now separated from her 
former connections, and from him who had 
been the evil genius of the scene, began to re- 
sume her wonted tone. The eternal spirit of 
the universe seemed to descend upon her, and 
she drank in breathlessly the sensation, which 
the silent night, the starry heavens, and the 
sleeping earth bestowed upon her. All seemed 



^56 VALPERGA. [Ch. XII. 

so peaceful, that no unwelcome sensation in 
her own heart could disturb the scene of which 
she felt herself a part. She looked up, and 
exclaimed in her own beautiful Italian, whose 
soft accents and expressive phrases then so 
much transcended all other European languages 
— " What a brave canopy has this earth, and 
how graciously does the supreme empyrean 
smile upon its nursling ! " 

" E Bellissimo/' replied her guide, " mafi- 
guratevi, Madonna, se e tanto hello sul rovescio, 
cosa mai sard al dritto^." 

Euthanasia smiled at the fancy of one so 
uncouth in manners and habits of life; and 
she rephed, — " Who knows how soon it may 
be my destiny to see that other side, which 
you imagine outdoes this subhme spectacle in 
splendour ? " 

" Heaven preserve you long upon earth// 

* I could not refrain from recording in their ori- 
ginal language the words of a Florentine peasant. A 
poet might well envy the vivacity of this man's ima- 
gination. 



Ch. XII.] VALPKRGA. 257 

replied the man ; " and make you as happy as 
you deserve, as happy as you have made 
others ! " 

*' Do you know me then ? " 

'* I dwell in the village of Valperga. I and 
my family have been Aldiani there, since the 
time of the old count Goffredo, your great- 
grandfather. But, Madonna, please you to 
put spur to your horse ; for we have little time, 
and I fear that before long the heavens will be 
overclouded; that last putF had something of 
the scirocco in it, and I see a mist in the west 
that foretels wind from that quarter." 

They put their horses to the gallop. Eu- 
thanasia's was a noble steed, and bore her 
proudly on. She felt her spirits rise with the 
exhilarating motion ; the wind gathered from 
the west, and scattered her hair, which, as she 
quitted her prison, she had slightly bound with 
a handkerchief; and, as she faced the breeze, 
its warm breath brought the lagging blood to 
her cheeks. 

They approached the sea, and began to hear 
its roar ; the breeze became stronger as they 
drew near. The beach was flat, and the small 



Q58 VALPERGA. [ChXlI. 

line of sand that bordered the waters, was now 
beaten upon, and covered by tfie waves. As 
they came near, Euthanasia felt some curiosity 
to know her destination ; but she saw nothing 
but the dim weed-grown field, and the white 
breakers of the troubled ocean. It was not 
until they were close upon the sand, that she 
discerned a large black boat drawn up on the 
beach, and several men near it. One of them 
came up, and asked the word, which the coun- 
tryman gave ; and then a man, who had the 
appearance of a leader, came from the boat, 
and welcomed Euthanasia. — " I am command- 
ed," he said, " by the prince of Lucca to re- 
ceive you, lady." 

" And whither am T to go ? " 

He pointed to a vessel which rode hard by, 
— so near, that she wondered she had not seen 
it before. Its black hulk cast a deep shade 
upon the waters ; and the dim sails, increased 
to an extraordinary size by the darkness, flap- 
ped heavily. She looked upon it with sur- 
prize, and wondered whither it was to bear 
her ; but she asked no more questions : ad- 
dressing herself for her departure, she took a 



oil. XII.] VALPERGA. 259 

kind leave of the countryman, and gave him 
the little gold that she had with her. The 
man turned to the chief, and said, — " Sir 
knight, if it be not thought impertinent, have 
the courtesy to inform me wdiither that vessel 
is bound." 

The man looked at him somewhat haughti- 
ly : but replied — " To Sicily." Sicily was 
then under the rule of the family of the kings 
of Arragon, who inherited from the daughter 
of Manfred, and were of course Ghibelines. 

" The Virgin Mother bless your voyage ! '' 
said her guide to Euthanasia, — " I am afraid 
that it will be rough, for an ugly wind is rising : 
but the saints will surely guard you.'' 

Euthanasia stepped into the boat ; its com- 
mander sat beside her; and the men took 
their oars : she waved her hand to her guide, 
saying, " Farewel, may God bless you ! " she 
added in a low tone, half to herself — " They 
speak Italian also in Sicily." 

These were the last words she ever spoke to 
any one who returned to tell the tale. The 
countryman stood upon the beach ; — he saw 
the boat moor beside the vessel; he saw its 



260 VALPERGA. [Ch. XII. 

crew ascend the dark sides. The boat was 
drawn up ; the sails were set ; and they bore 
out to sea, receding slowly with many tacks, 
for the wind was contrary ; — the vessel faded 
on the sight ; and he turned about, and speeded 
to Lucca. 

The wind changed to a more northerly di- 
rection during the night; and the land-breeze 
of the morning filled their sails, so that, al- 
though slowly, they dropt down southward. 
About noqn they met a Pisan vessel, who 
bade them beware of a Genoese squadron, 
which was cruizing off Corsica : so they bore 
in nearer to the shore. At sunset that day a 
fierce scirocco rose, accompanied by thunder 
and lightning, such as is seldom seen during 
the winter season. Presently they saw huge, 
dark columns, descending from heaven, and 
meeting the sea, which boiled beneath ; they 
were borne on by the storm, and scattered by 
the wind. The rain came down in sheets ; 
and the hail clattered, as it fell to its grave in 
the ocean ; — the ocean was lashed into such 
waves, that, many miles inland, during the 
pauses of the wind, the hoarse and constant 



Ch. XII.] VALPERGA. 2§1 

murmurs of the far-off sea made the well- 
housed landsman mutter one more prayer for 
tliose exposed to its fury. 

Such was the storm, as it was seen from 
shore. Nothing more was ever known of the 
Sicilian vessel which bore Euthanasia. It 
never reached its destined port, nor were any 
of those on board ever after seen. The centi- 
nels who watched near Vado, a tower on the 
sea beach of the Maremma, found on the fol- 
lowing day, that the waves had washed on 
shore some of the wrecks of a vessel ; they 
picked up a few planks and a broken mast, 
round which, tangled with some of its cordage, 
was a white silk handkerchief, such a one as 
had bound the tresses of Euthanasia the night 
that she had embarked, and in its knot were a 
few golden hairs. 

She was never heard of more; even her 
name perished. She slept in the oozy cavern 
of the ocean ; the sea- weed was tangled with 
her shining hair ; and the spirits of the deep 
wondered that the earth had trusted so lovely 
a creature to the barren bosom of the sea. 



^62 VALPEUGA. [Ch. XII. 

which, as an evil step-mother, deceives and 
betrays all committed to her care. 

Earth felt no change when she died ; and 
men forgot her. Yet a lovelier spirit never 
ceased to breathe, nor was a lovelier form 
ever destro3ed amidst the many it brings forth. 
Endless tears might well have been shed at her 
loss ; yet for her none wept, save the piteous 
skies, which deplored the mischief they had 
themselves committed ; — none moaned except 
the sea-birds that flapped their heavy wings 
above the ocean-cave wherein she lay ; — and 
the muttering thunder alone tolled her passing 
bell, as she quitted a life, which for her had 
been replete with change and sorrow. 



VALPERGA. 263 



CONCLUSION. 



The private chronicles, from which the fore- 
going relation has been collected, end with the 
death of Euthanasia. It is therefore in public 
histories alone that we find an account of the 
last years of the Hfe of Castruccio. We can 
know nothing of his grief, when he found that 
she whom he had once tenderly loved, and 
whom he had ever revered as the best and 
wisest among his friends, had died. We know 
however that, during the two years that he 
survived this event, his glory and power arose 
not only higher than they had ever before done, 
but that they surpassed those of any former 
Italian prince. 

Louis of Bavaria, king of the Romans, en- 
tered Italy in the month of February 1327- 
He found Castruccio, the scourge of the 
Guelphs, the first power of Tuscany, and the 
principal supporter of his own titles and pre- 
tensions. 



264 VALPERGA. 

Louis of Bavaria was crowned with the iron 
crown at Milan. But his proceedings were 
tyrannical and imprudent. He deprived Ga- 
leazzo Visconti of his power, imprisoned him, 
and set up the shadow of a repubhc at Milan, 
which was in fact composed of a few Ghibe- 
hne nobles, who by their jealousies and dissen- 
tions served only to weaken his power. 

He marched through Lombardy, crossed 
the Apennines at Parma, and was met by 
Castruccio at Pontremoli. The prince, whose 
chief aim was to ingratiate himself with, and 
to raise himself to power through the favour 
of, the emperor, made his visit more agreeable 
through the magnificent presents by which he 
was accompanied ; and his sagacity, warlike 
spirit, and agreeable manners gained for him 
an easy entrance into the councils, and after- 
wards into the friendship, of Louis. They pro- 
ceeded together to Pisa. The Pisans at first 
refused entrance to the emperor, but yielded 
after he had besieged them a few days. Louis 
then visited Lucca, w^here he erected a dutchy 
composed of the towns and territory of Lucca, 
Pistoia, Volterra and Lunigiana, and created 



VALPEBGA. 265 

Castruccio duke, honouring and exalting him 
as his best friend, and the firmest support of 
the imperial power. 

They went to Rome together, where the 
emperor knighted him, and he bore the sword 
of state in the procession from the CampidogUo 
to St. Peter's, where Louis received the impe- 
rial crown. He was created count of the pa- 
lace, senator of Rome, and master of the court. 
He had arrived at the summit of his glory ; he 
was more feared and obeyed than the emperor 
himself; and, in the expedition which Louis 
meditated against Naples, king Robert dread- 
ed Castruccio alone, as his most formidable 
and craftiest enemy. It was then, that thfe 
proud AntelminelU invested himself in a robe 
of silk richly adorned with gold and jewels ; 
and on the breast were embroidered these 
words — EgLI E' come DIO VUOLE. And 
on the shoulders, E' SI SARA QUEL CHE 
DIO V0RRA\ 

While he was thus enjoying the maturity of 
his glory, and partaking all the amusements 
and feasts of the capital of Italy, he received 
inteUigence that the Florentines had possessed 
themselves of Lucca. Without a moment's 
VOL. III. N 



266 VALPEKGA. 

delay, he quitted Rome, traversed the Ma- 
remma with a small band of friends, and ap- 
peared, when he was least expected, in the 
midst of his enemies. 

It was here that he again met Galeazzo 
Visconti. At Castruccio's request the emperor 
had released him from prison ; and he came to 
serve under the ensigns of his more fortunate 
friend. Their meeting was an occasion of 
mutual joy ; they embraced each other affec- 
tionately, and confirmed and renewed the vows 
of friendship and support which they had enter- 
ed into more than ten years before. Castruc- 
cio enjoyed for a short time the unalloyed plea- 
sure which the society of his friend afforded 
him ; they recounted to each other their va- 
rious fortunes ; and, in recording the events 
which had passed since their separation, Ga- 
leazzo found, that, if he had lost sovereignty 
and power, Castruccio had lost that which 
might be considered far more valuable ; he 
had lost his dearest friends ; and on his pale 
cheek might be read, that, although he dis- 
dained to acknowledge the power of fortune, 
she had made him feel in his heart's core her 
poisoned shafts. We know nothing of the 



VALPERGA. 267 

private communion of these friends ; but we 
may guess that, if Castruccio revealed the 
sorrows of his heart, Galeazzo might have 
regretted that, instead of having instigated the 
ambition, and destroyed the domestic felicity 
of his friend, he had not taught him other les- 
sons, through which he might have enjoyed 
that peace, sympathy and happiness, of which 
he was now^ for ever deprived. 

His presence restored the state of his affairs. 
He possessed himself of Pisa, recovered Pis- 
toia, and again returned in triumph to Lucca. 
But this was the term of his victories. During 
the siege of Pistoia he had tasked his strength 
beyond human suffering ; he was ever in the 
trenches on horseback, or on foot exposed to 
the hot sun of July, encouraging the soldiers, 
directing the pioneers, and often, in the ardour 
of impatience, he himself took the spade, and 
worked among them. He neither rested nor 
slept ; and the heats of noon-day, and the dews 
of night alike fell upon him. Immediately on 
his return to his native city, he was seized with 
a malignant fever. He knew that he was 
about to die ; and, with that coolness and pre- 
N -2 



2G8 VALPERGA. 

sence of mind which was his peculiar characte- 
ristic, he made every arrangement necessary 
for the welfare of Lucca, and gave particular 
directions to his captains for the prosecution 
of the war. But he felt, that he left behind 
him no fitting successor ; and that, if he were 
the sole creator and only support of the Luc- 
chese, so they would fall into their primitive 
insignificance when he expired. Lying thus 
on the bed of pain, and conscious that in a few 
hours he must surely die, he grasped the hand 
of Vanni Mordecastelli, who wept beside him, 
saying : £o morro, e vedrete il mondo per varie 
turbolenze confondersi, e rivoltarsi ogni cosa. 
This consideration cast a gloom over his last mo- 
ments ; yet he supported himself with courage. 
Galeazzo Visconti had assisted Castruccio 
in all his labours, exposing himself with Uke 
imprudence, and labouring with equal energy. 
tie was attacked at Pistoia with the same 
fever and the same symptoms. Hearing that 
the prince was ill at Lucca, he desired, al- 
though dying, to be conveyed to him. He 
w^as carried as far as Pescia, where he expired 
on the third of September 1328. 



VALPERGA. 2G9 

On the same clay, and at the same hour, 
Castruccio died at Lacca. 

His enemies rejoiced in his death ; his 
friends were confounded and overthrown. 
They, as the last act of gratitude, conducted 
the pomp of his funeral with princely magni- 
ficence. He was buried in the church of San 
Francesco, then without, now included within, 
the walls of Lucca. The antient tombstone 
is still seen on the walls of the church; and its 
inscription may serve for the moral and con- 
clusion of this tale. 

En vivo vivamque 
fama rerum gestarum 

iTALICiE MILITIJE SPLEN- 
DOR; LUCENSIUM 
DECUS ETRURI.B 
ORNAMENTUM CaS- 

TRuccius Gerii An- 

TELMINELLORUM STIRPE 

VIXI PECCAVI DOLUI 

CESSI NATURiE INDIGEN- 

TI ANIMiE PliE BENEVOLI 

SUCCURRITE BREVI MEMORES 

VOS MORITUROS. 



THE END. 